ECE 585/SID: 999-28-7104/Taposh Dutta Roy

1

Instructional Level Parallelism
Taposh Dutta Roy, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper is a review of the developments in
Instruction level parallelism. It takes into account all the changes
made in speeding up the execution. The various drawbacks and
dependencies due to pipelining are discussed and various
solutions to overcome them are also incorporated. It goes ahead
in the last section to explain where is the new research leading us.
Index Terms—Branch Prediction, Exceptions, Instructional
level parallelism, pipelining.

I

I. INTRODUCTION

N order to improve the performance of the machine,
parallelism or pipelining is used. The basic idea in using
pipelining is to make use of multiple instructions in one
clock cycle. This is possible only if there are no dependencies
between the two instructions. In a nutshell, we can say that
Instructional Level Parallelism is an issue that deals with
exploiting parallelism at instructional level. It basically deals
with the scheduling the instructions such that there are no
hazards.
It is important to note that when a programmer writes a
program, he assumes serial execution of the instruction. The
role of the ILP processor is to take a serial program (i.e. a
specification of operations to execute)remove much of the
non-essential sequential execution in this specification so that
the program can be processed in parallel, and turn the program
into a high performance version. The above transformation
must occur transparent to the programmer. An ILP processor
that executes the serial program in parallel is called a SuperScalar processor. The basic idea of this paper is to discuss the
instructional level parallelism - concept, hazards, limitations
and future trends.
II. ILP AND ITS RELEVANCE TO COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE

Since the beginning of computing history, computer architects
have been craving for speed i.e., improving the number of
tasks to be implemented in a unit time. Instructional level
Parallelism was obviously the most important break through
in the technology. It paved the path for dealing with multiple
instructions in one clock cycle. However there were many
problems in putting to practice this simple idea. These
problems were basically due to the dependencies between the
instructions and the need of sequence.
Manuscript received April 25, 2002. This work was submitted as a part of
the course on Advanced computer Architecture at Illinois Institute of
Technology, Chicago. It is based on the research papers on Instructional Level
Parallelism.
T. P. Dutta Roy is a master’s student, in Electrical Engineering
Department at Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616 USA
(phone: 312-2593934; e-mail: taposh_dr@ hotmail.com).

This idea, first implemented in CDC 6600 computer, has
greatly advanced and lot of ground has been captured in this
respect. Instructional level parallelism is still an area of
exploration and more work is expected in this field. In this
paper, I plan to explain the concepts, the various drawbacks
and strategies to solve them and future development.
III. HISTORY OF INSTRUCTIONAL LEVEL PARALLELISM
A. Initial Stage
The concept of instructional level parallelism was first
developed in 1940s. The first idea of parallelism or horizontal
micro-code came into print in Turning’s 1946 design of the
Pilot ACE and was carefully described by Wilkes [1951]. A
major statement that is of historical importance is “In some
cases it may be possible for two or more micro-operations to
take place at the same time”[Wilkes and Stringer 1953].
During 1960s transistorized computers were prevalent, but
with the advent of CDC 6600, a Control Data Corporation
machine, basic instructions came into use. This paved the path
for a more complex machine and at the right time IBM
launched its 360/91, which also introduced instructional level
parallelism. This machine based partly on IBM’s instructionlevel parallelism experiment offered less parallelism than the
CDC 6600, but was far more ambitious than the CDC 6600 in
its attempt to rearrange the instruction stream to keep the
functional units busy. In the late 1970s the beginning of a new
style of ILP, called very long instruction word (VLIW), came
into picture. It could be seen as if the VLIW architectures
were the natural growth towards parallel architecture. The
VLIW architecture was prevalent in the 1980s and few
computer startups started developing their computers with
various levels of parallelism.
B. Development Stage
In the 1990s, with the development in silicon technology,
RISC computers were developed with some super-scalar
capability. Research in this dimension led to development of
most current explicitly parallel instruction computer (EPIC)
architecture [2]. From what is made public to date it appears
to be a wide instruction set architecture, with three
instructions per 128-bit instruction parcel. It supports
predicated and speculative execution. More over it can be seen
that emphasis is made on employing dynamic scheduling
technique in addition to the static scheduling.
IV.

INSTRUCTION PROCESSING

In a single threaded computer processing, the instruction takes
place serially with nearly no hazards and stalls. However,

ECE 585/SID: 999-28-7104/Taposh Dutta Roy
expanding the horizon towards pipelining makes a lot of
achievement in speed, but also invites us to overcome a lot of
interdependencies. Here the task of instruction processing is
divided into several stages and processing of different
instructions can be overlapped. By proper organization of the
pipelining stages multiple instructions can be processed in one
clock cycle and the updates that are valid is to be done in the
last stage [1]. Determining how one instruction depends on
the instructions can be made to flow through the pipeline like
a serial program any updates that are needed to another is
critical not only to the scheduling process but also to
determine how much parallelism exits in a program and how
that parallelism can be exploited. In particular to exploit
instructional level parallelism we need to know which
instructions can be executed in parallel. If two instructions are
parallel they can execute simultaneously in a pipeline without
causing stalls, assuming the pipeline has sufficient resources
and hence no structural hazards exist. The main drawbacks
that come in the development of ILP are pipeline hazards.
Hazards are situations that prevent the next instruction in the
instruction stream to execute during its designated clock cycle.
A. Hazards and Dependencies
[1] provides a good classification of hazards into Structural
hazards, one that arises due to limited resources, when
hardware cannot support all possible combinations in
simultaneous overlapped execution, Data hazards arise when
an instruction depends on the previous instruction in a way
that is exposed by overlapping of instructions in the pipeline
and Control hazards arise from pipelining of branches and
other instructions that change the program counter. Data
Hazards can be considered as a separate class called
Dependencies and this can be further classified into three
groups Data dependency, Name dependency and Control
dependency.
B. IBM 360/91 machine overview
IBM 360/91, a pioneering machine of 1960s was responsible
for several key contributions to high performance instruction
processing [3]. This machine had four floating point registers
and no cache. It took 12 cycles to service a load operation
from memory. To tolerate this long latency, the load operation
had to be overlapped with other instructions. With small
number of available registers this meant possible overlap with
other instructions that wrote into the same register as the load
instruction. An important contribution of 360/91 was a
mechanism of overcoming WAW hazards in instruction
processing. This mechanism commonly known as Tomasulo’s
algorithm converts the sequential program representation into
a data flow representation and then processes the instruction
as per the ordering constraints in the dataflow representations
rather than in the specified program order. WAW hazards as
discussed earlier are overcome with register renaming. Here
there are more physical storage elements that hold the results
of the instruction than there are architectural registers. The
architectural register names in an instruction can be used to
obtain a name (i.e. a tag) for a physical storage element, and
physical storage element names rather than architectural
register names are used for instruction execution. This process

2
becomes very important when the instructions are executed
speculatively, regardless of the number of architectural
registers. There physical registers will be needed to hold the
outcomes of instructions to the correct instruction that creates
the source operand value. The IBM 360/91 also recognized
the importance of maintaining an uninterrupted supply of
instructions for overall performance. To avoid a disruption
when a branch instruction was encountered , it fetched
instructions from both paths of a branch.[3] describes the
entire organization of the machine IBM 360/91 with a final
topic that deals with any design refinements which have been
added to the basic organization.
V. EXCEPTIONS
Interrupts are present in both in sequential architecture and in
pipelined architecture. They cause the program to stop.
However , when we come across the interrupt it is important
for the architecture to note the process state, which generally
contains the state of program counter, register and memory, so
that the program can be started from the same point where it
had stopped. In a pipelined architecture, depending on
whether the state is saved or not we classify interrupts as
precise or imprecise interrupts [4]. A precise interrupt is one
that is consistent with the sequential architecture and reflects
the following conditions, viz.,
1) Instructions before program counter: All instructions
before the instruction indicated by the program counter are
executed and have modified the process state correctly.
2) Instructions after program counter: All instructions after
the instruction indicated by the program counter are not
executed and have not modified the process state correctly.
3) Interrupted Instruction handling: If the interrupt is
caused by the instruction exception, then the saved program
counter should point to the interrupted instruction. The
interrupted instruction may or may not be executed,
depending on the definition of the architecture and cause of
the interrupt.
If the saved process state is inconsistent with the
sequential architectural model and does not satisfy the above
conditions, then the interrupt is imprecise. Interrupts can also
be classified as Program interrupts, that are caused due to the
instructions and External interrupts, that are caused by
sources outside the currently executing process, sometimes
completely unrelated.
In 360/91 the interrupts were imprecise, because maintaining a
precise state would require additional hardware and there were
no reasons that would improve the performance of the
machine significantly. It did not support virtual memory,
where transparent handling of page fault exceptions is
required, and therefore did not have one of the most important
reasons for precise exception. The lack of precise exceptions
had an important drawback that the machine was hard to
debug, because the errors were not always reproducible.
Precise interrupts were important when machines started
arriving with virtual memory. Virtual memory is a transparent
appearance of an addressable memory larger than what
physically present in the machine [5]. This appearance of
Virtual Memory, given by a layer of software, is responsible

ECE 585/SID: 999-28-7104/Taposh Dutta Roy
for moving pages between a virtual store and a physical store
when a desired page is not present in the physical store. These
software assume a sequential program execution, so to support
transparent virtual memory, a precise machine state needs to
be recovered at any point in the program at which page fault
could occur.
A. Implementing Precise Interrupts in CDC
[4] Describes schemes to implement precise interrupts, one of
these schemes were used in the CDC Cyber 180.
The three methods are (1) Presence of a buffer in addition to
the main register file, where in the buffer contains old values
of registers and hence called “History Buffer”, while the main
register file is updated out of the program order. (2) Reorder
buffer, this will contain all the instructions after they complete
execution, it is responsible to reorder them as per the program
order and then write it in register file. (3) a future file method,
where there are two register files, an architecturally precise
file that is updated in program order and an imprecise, or
future, file that is updated out of the program order.
VI. SPECULATIVE EXECUTION
Speculative Execution defines a methodology for avoiding
constrains in parallelism by making some speculative early
predictions. The main constraint that comes in parallelism is
due to branching, because we do not know which instructions
are to be executed till we know the out come of the branches.
The main idea in Speculative Execution is that outcome of a
branch is predicted and the instructions from the predicted
path are executed. James E. Smith’s paper on branch
prediction techniques was the one that first described dynamic
prediction schemes. The two bit counter described in the paper
[6] was one of the most accurate counter. However the paper
by Yeh and Patt introduced the concept of tracking the
outcomes of previous branches and using this, along with the
a history predictor as described by [6] . Further there was also
a concept of control speculation by eliminating branches. This
idea of conditional execution converted the control
dependencies into data dependencies. Both of these techniques
are being used today in the most recent EPIC architecture.
There were some mechanisms like the Register Update Unit,
suggested by the [8], where in a change in the model
architecture is being used to facilitate precise interrupts and
thus gives an assurance of smooth program execution. The
paper [8] in its section 4.2 clearly lists the functions of the
RUU. Another, mechanism in parallelism was demonstrated
by [9] which basically dealt with developing an architecture
that has all the components busy. [9] Introduced HPS (High
Performance Substrate) for high performance computer
engine, it also exposed a drawback or potential limitation of
micro engine “One Operation per cycle”. The paper
emphasized on local parallelism as an alternative and selected
restricted form of data flow based on the idea that parallelism
available from the middle control flow tier (i.e. sequential
control flow architecture) is highly localized. Their concept
was to reduce the active instruction window, to exploit almost

3
all the inherent parallelism in the program, thus reducing the
synchronization cost that would be needed to keep the entire
program around as a total data flow graph.

VII. ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW
A. IBM RISC System/6000 Processor
[12] IBM RISC system/6000 processor is super-scalar
processor that integrates packaging of chips in small
packages. The general organization consists of an ICU that
fetched instructions and executed the branch and condition
register instructions. It dispatched two instructions per cycle
to a Floating Point Unit (FPU), Fixed Point Unit (FXU). The
FXU performed fixed-point arithmetic, address calculation for
FP loads and stores, translates the addresses and controls the
data cache. Thus the architecture allowed one floating-point,
one fixed point, one branch and a LCR instruction to be
performed simultaneously. One chip was dedicated in fetching
multiple instructions in one cycle. The 2-way set associative
instruction cache was composed of four small independent
arrays that allowed four interleaving instructions to be fetched
and placed in them computed by modulo 4. To avoid
branching delays, four instructions are scanned ahead of time
using the branch scanning logic so that the branch target can
be fetched and outcome predicted. Branch prediction
mechanisms are not used. When the target is evaluated, the
pre-fetched instructions are either executed or discarded.
Synchronization between the FPU uses instruction pre-fetch
buffers IPB0-IBP3 that feeds data into decoders D0-D3. The
FXU has a similar setup and uses PD0-PD3 as decoders. The
FXU operations are always in R0 and R1 while FP uses other
registers . Register renaming is used to prevent clashes
between the FXU and FPU. R0 and R1 are re-name registers,
and a map table entry, which is 32-entry, 6, bit wide maintains
correspondence of an architectural register and the physical
register. The Free List (FL) contains the list of unassigned
registers, Pending –Target Return Queue (PTRQ) contains the
physical registers used by instructions. Floating point uses
BUSY and BYPASS registers to locate physical registers.
This allows making use of each functional unit to the
maximum provides synchronization between fixed-floating
point units and precise interrupts can be implemented. This is
a powerful, robust, high performance platform used for a wide
range of applications.
B. MIPS R10000 Superscalar Microprocessor
[13] MIPS R10000 is a dynamic super-scalar microprocessor
implementing 64-bit Mips 4 instruction set architecture. It has
one cluster bus connecting as many as 4 chips. The R10000
implements register mapping and non-blocking caches, which
complement each other to overlap cache refill operations.
Thus, if an instruction misses in the cache it must wait for its
operand to be refilled, but other instructions can continue out
of order. This increases the memory use and reduces effective
latency, because refills begin early and up to four refills
proceed in parallel while the processor executes other
instructions. This type of cache design is called “non

ECE 585/SID: 999-28-7104/Taposh Dutta Roy
blocking”, because cache refills do not block subsequent
accesses to other cache lines. The R10000 design includes
complex hardware that dynamically reorders instruction
execution based on operand availability. This hardware
immediately adapts whenever cache misses delay instructions.
The processor looks ahead up to 32 instructions to find
possible parallelism. This instruction window is large enough
to hide most of the refills from the secondary cache. However,
it can hide only a fraction of main memory latency, which is
typically much longer.
VIII. FUTURE TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENT
As time flies, technology develops. Super-scalar
architectures, where in, any program can be made parallel was
an invention, then EPIC developed with its capabilities of
using both predicted and control speculation for branches. The
most recent invention in this filed is “Processor with
conditional execution of every instruction”, [10] is a patent
filed on this invention on 16th April 2002. Here the author
urges to consider all instructions as conditional instructions.
He devices a scheme in which there is an instruction filed in
each and every instruction. This instruction filed consists of a
conditional identifier, which corresponds to a condition
register. The condition register contains the condition value. If
the condition value is the first condition, then the instruction is
executed else the given instruction is treated as NOP if the
said condition has the second condition value. Further if the
condition identifier value is same as the value of the preselected identifier, then the instruction is unconditionally
executed and not treated as a NOP. The author in this
invention provides a general-purpose microprocessor
architecture enabling more efficient computations of a type in
which Boolean operations and arithmetic operations
conditioned on the results of the Boolean operations are
interleaved. The microprocessor is provided with a plurality of
general purpose registers (“GPRs”) and an arithmetic logic
unit (“ALU”), capable of performing arithmetic operations
and Boolean operations. The ALU has a first input and a
second input, and an output, the first and second inputs
receiving values stored in the GPRS. The output stores the
results of the arithmetic logic unit operations in the GPRs. At
least one of the GPRS is capable of receiving directly from the
ALU a result of a Boolean operation. In one embodiment, at
least one of the GPRS capable of receiving directly from the
ALU a result of a Boolean operation is configured so as to
cause the conditioning of an arithmetic operation of the ALU
based on the value stored in the GPR. A method is also
provided , performed in a microprocessor having such an
architecture, in which a Boolean operation is performed in the
ALU to obtain thereby a Boolean value representing the result
of the Boolean operation. The Boolean value is stored in a
first general purpose register in the same clock cycle as that in
which the Boolean operation is performed. Thereafter, an
arithmetic operation is performed in the arithmetic logic unit
and the result of the arithmetic operation is stored in a second
general purpose register. However, the step of

4
performing/Storing is conditioned on the Boolean value stored
in the first general purpose register. This concept on its self is
an innovative one and further development is expected in this
area. James Smith in his paper [11] describes a new trend in
ILP. He says that sooner ILP will change into ILDP standing
for instructional-level distributed processing, emphasizing
inter-instruction communication with dynamic optimization
and a tight interaction between hardware and low-level
software. Now there will more considerations of the on-chip
wire delays and power considerations will not permit billions
of transistors to be used in a chip. ILDP micro-architecture
paradigm described in this paper has distributed functional
units, each fairly simple and with a very high frequency clock.
Figure 1 below shows the ILDP micro-architecture. The
communication between instructions should be localized to
small units as this will take smaller wire as compared to
having communication to longer units. The longer the wire,
more is the delay. This type of unit is extremely power
efficient and has minimal delay. This is where the future going
to be in the recent years.

ILDP Micro-architecture[11]
IX. CONCLUSION
This paper is a review of the papers in the Instruction Level
Parallelism area. This survey of papers from the book, current
literature and through recent patents in this area makes it clear
that soon Instructional Level parallelism will be distributed,
i.e. Instruction Level Distributed Processing (ILDP) and the
exceptions will be removed by conditional prediction of each
and every instruction. This will not only make the new

ECE 585/SID: 999-28-7104/Taposh Dutta Roy
computers power efficient but also minimize the delay to a
large extent.
REFERENCES

[1] John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson , “ Computer Architecture a
Quantitative Approach”.
[2] J. Crawford and J. Huck ,” Motivations and design approach for the IA-64
64-Bit instruction set architecture” Microprocessor Forum, San Jose , CA, 14
Oct. 1977.
[3] D. W. Anderson, F. J. Sparacio, and R. M. Tomasulo, “The IBM
System/360 Model 91: Machine philosophy and instruction-handling”, IBM
Journal of Research and Development, pp.8-24, Jan 1967.
[4] James E. Smith and Andrew R. Pleszkun, ”Implementing Precise
Interrupts in Pipelined Processors”
[5] P. J Denning “ Virtual Memory”, ACM computing Surveys, vol. 2, pp.
153-289,Sept 1970.
[6] James E. Smith “ Study of Branch Prediction Techniques”
[7]C. J. Hughes, V.S. Pai, P. Ranganathan and S. Adve “Rsim: simulating
shared-memory multiprocessors with ILP processor computers”, vol. 35, pp.
40-49 Feb 2002
[8] G.S.Sohi and S. Vajapeyan “ Instruction Issue Logic for High
Performance, Interruptable Pipelined Processors”
[9] Patt, Hwu, and Shebanow “ HPS, A new microarchitecture: Rationale and
Introduction”
[10] “Processor with conditional execution of every instruction” Seshan et. al
USA Patent 6,374,346 April 16, 2002
[11] Smith J.E “Instruction-level distributed processing” Computer, Volume:
34, Issue 4, April 2001 pp:59-65
[12] “Machine Organization of the IBM RISC System/ 6000 processor” G.F.
Grohoski, Volume 34, Number 1, January 1990.
[13] “The Mips R10000 Super-scalar Microprocessor”, Kenneth C. Yeager,
Silicon Graphics, Inc.
Web references
www.ee.pdx.edu/~driscoll/EE510MD/notes/ilp/index.htm
http://ece.clemson.edu/mfrankl/lab.html
www.jilp.org
//www.mdronline.com
www.uspto.gov

5

