Using Deep Neural Networks for Estimating Loop
Unrolling Factor

arXiv:1911.03991v1 [cs.DC] 10 Nov 2019

Asma Balamane
LMCS (ESI)
Algiers, Algeria
ea balamane@esi.dz

Zina Taklit
LMCS (ESI)
Algiers, Algeria
ez taklit@esi.dz

Riyadh Baghdadi
CSAIL (MIT)
Massachusetts, USA
baghdadi@mit.edu

Abstract To achieve high performance in modern
processors, compilers should optimize programs. We
address in this paper Loop Unrolling optimization,
proposing a novel approach based on deep neural networks to automatically optimize loops in TIRAMISU.
TIRAMISU is a new language to create a code of high
performance. It allows to separate between the algorithm
and its optimizations [1].
Key words
Loop Unrolling, Deep Neural Network,
Feature Extraction, TIRAMISU compiler.

1

Introduction

Optimizing programs requires deep expertise. On one
hand, it is a tedious task, because it requires a lot of tests to
find out the best combination of optimizations to apply with
their best factors. On the other hand, this task is critical,
because it may degrade the program performance instead of
improving it. The automatization of this task can deal with
this problem and permit to obtain good results. Optimizing
loops that take the most significant part of the program execution time plays a crucial role to achieve best performance.
In this paper, we address Loop unrolling optimization, by
proposing a deep Neural Network model to predict the optimal unrolling factor for TIRAMISUs programs.
TIRAMISU is a polyhedral framework [2] designed
to generate high performance code for multiple platforms
including multicores, GPUs, and distributed machines.
TIRAMISU introduces a scheduling language with novel
commands to explicitly manage the complexities that arise
when targeting these systems [1].

2

Loop unrolling
Loop unrolling is the transformation in which the loop
body is replicated k times where k is a given unrolling factor.
It is used to reduce overhead by decreasing the number of
iterations and hence the number of branch operations. Loop
unrolling enables other optimizations, many of which target
the memory system. The main important advantage of loop
unrolling is that it exposes instruction level parallelism (ILP)
to the compiler [3]. Unrolling improves performance almost
in all cases where it is applied in a significant way [4]. However, if the loop unrolling is not carefully applied, it may
negatively affect other important optimizations and reduce
overall performance. Choosing the right factor of unrolling
is also very important. The best unrolling factor reduces execution time and improves global performance. Therefore,
through this research, we aim to design a model that predict
the best unrolling factor.

3

Learning Loop Unrolling Factor Models
In this section, we present our model design that predicts
the best loop unrolling factor. We use TIRAMISU compiler
[1] as execution platform, a polyhedral compiler that allows
flexible application of different loop optimizations.
3.1 Input program features
For any machine learning technique, selecting the best input features is a crucial step. Since our contribution focus on
the loop unrolling optimization which is a local optimization,
we implement a method to extract features automatically for
each loop nest (TIRAMISU computation). This loop nests
abstraction summarizes the characteristics that influence the
execution efficiency on modern processors and gives a highlevel representation independently on the execution architecture platforms.

Table 1.

Figure and table captions do not end with a period

Loop levels characteristics
Number of the loop nest levels
Number of dependencies between loop nest levels
List of dependent levels for each loop nest level
Loop span for each level
Whether there is a predicate before each loop level
Operations characteristics
Operation loop level / operation rank in the loop level
Fig. 1.

Number of variables/invariants used in the operation
Operation histogram per operands type

DNN model for estimating the best unrolling factor.

Table 2.

Loads/stores histogram per operands type
Number of library calls for each loop nest level
Schedule (Optimizations) characteristics
Whether the optimization is applied
The loop nest levels the optimization is applied

subset of the model hyperparameters.

Activation function

ReLu

Optimization algorithm

ADAM [6]

Learning rate

10−3

Initialisation algorithm

Random uniform

Number of iterations

Early stopping technique

Factors used for each applied optimization
List of dependent loop nest (global optimizations case)

The features vector contains the most important nest loop
characteristics such as the number of loop nest levels, dependencies between loop nest levels and the loop operations
characteristic, etc.. In the other hand, other loop optimizations can be already applied on the loop nests, we associate
for each loop nest the features list of schedule optimizations.
The table 1 presents a subset of features given by the automatic extraction method.
Collecting training data must be carefully done. We use
TIRAMISU code generator tool to generate parameterized
unrolled code with different other optimizations cases. We
exhaustively search for the optimal unrolling factor of the
generated programs to create the training data set.

3.2

Using Deep Neural Networks (DNN) to Learn Loop
Unrolling factor model
We used a deep neural network to construct a supervised
classification model. It allows the prediction of the best unrolling factor. In a classification model, outputs (classes) are
predefined. It receives as input a set of labeled learning data
to learn how to classify new programs. The architecture of
the neural network is based on the typical architecture of
multilayer perceptron (MLP) [5]. The model must predict
the output among the defined classes that represent the range
of possible values of the unrolling factor.

We adopted an empirical strategy to define the hyperparameters of the DNN. We found that four hidden layers with
500, 400, 250 and 100 neurons in each layer respectively,
gives the best accuracy. For each layer we dichotomically
tested the cases of neurons number. Concerning the other
model hyperparameters, we summarized tests results in the
table 2
4

Experimental results
The system is evaluated thanks to a set of benchmarks1 .
We have first implemented the exhaustive exploration of unrolling factors technique. It represents a reference for comparing the prediction model results. For each benchmark, we
have launched an exhaustive exploration of the unrolling factors in order to define the best factor and to compare it with
the factor predicted by the implemented model. We consider
for each benchmark three test cases (depending on the data
size or the applied optimizations).
for each test case we evaluate the PC and SP metrics that
represent ratios between programs execution time with the
optimal and predicted unrolling factors and without applying
unrolling optimization
PC = optimal exec/predit exec
SP = without exec/predit exec
We note in Figure2 that PC and SP rates vary from one
benchmark to another. In fact, for the MM × M and Blur
benchmark, we recorded fairly positive rates.

1 find benchmarks implementation in https://github.com/
AsmaBALAMANE/tiramisu/tree/master/benchmarks/
Automatic_unroll

[6] Bock, S., Goppold, J., and Weiss, M., 2018. “An improvement of the convergence proof of the adam optimizer”. CoRR.

Fig. 2.

Test results with the different benchmarks test cases.

This means that the model is able to learn good predictions
for dealing with the data locality problem that is required in
both benchmarks.To synthesize, the model learns highlevel
featuresfrom low level features. It gives predictions of the
best unrolling factor for new programs with a precision of up
to 20%. This shows that the model learns and it exceeds the
random prediction (whose precision is 14%)

5

Future work
The accuracy of our model is influenced by the lack of
data. Thereby, we are generating more data to improve
model accuracy.
In this paper, we presented the general design of based
Deep learning predictor for unrolling optimization. In order to develop a complete automatic optimization method for
TIRAMISU compiler, the final stage of our work will refine
the presented method by adding the loop optimizations selection method.

References
[1] Baghdadi, R., Ray, J., Ben Romdhane, M., Del Sozzo,
E., Akkas, A., Zhang, Y., Suriana, P., Kamil, S., and
Amarasinghe, S., 2019. “Tiramisu: A polyhedral compiler for expressing fast and portable code”. Proceedings
of the 2019 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO 2019), Feb.
[2] PRADELLE, B., 2011. “Mthodes statiques et dynamiques de compilation polydrique pour lexcution en
environnement multicoeurs”. PhD thesis, Universit de
Strasbourg.
[3] Stephenson, M., and Amarasinghe, S., 2005. “Predicting
unroll factors using supervised classification”.
[4] Bacon, D. F., Graham, S. L., and Sharp, O. J., 1994.
“Compiler transformations for high-performance computing”. pp. 345–420.
[5] Gardner, M., and Dorling, S., 1998. “Artificial neural
networks (the multilayer perceptron) a review of applications in the atmospheric sciences”. Atmospheric Environment.

