arXiv:2303.08710v1 [cs.CE] 15 Mar 2023

Two-Scale Optimization of Graded Lattice Structures
respecting Buckling on Micro- and Macroscale
Daniel Hübner1*, Fabian Wein1 and Michael Stingl1
1 Applied

Mathematics, Continuous Optimization, Friedrich-Alexander Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Cauerstr. 11, Erlangen, 91058, Germany.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): daniel.huebner@fau.de;
Contributing authors: fabian.wein@fau.de; michael.stingl@fau.de;
Abstract
Interest in components with detailed structures increased with the progress in advanced manufacturing techniques in recent years. Parts with graded lattice elements can provide interesting
mechanical, thermal, and acoustic properties compared to parts where only coarse features are
included. One of these improvements is better global buckling resistance of the component. However, thin features are prone to local buckling. Normally, analyses with high computational effort
are conducted on high-resolution finite element meshes to optimize parts with good global and local
stability. Until recently, works focused only on either global or local buckling behavior. We use
two-scale optimization based on asymptotic homogenization of elastic properties and local buckling behavior to reduce the effort of full-scale analyses. For this, we present an approach for
concurrent local and global buckling optimization of parameterized graded lattice structures. It is
based on a worst-case model for the homogenized buckling load factor, which acts as a safeguard
against pure local buckling. Cross-modes residing on both scales are not detected. We support
our theory with numerical examples and validations on dehomogenized designs, which show the
capabilities of our method, and discuss the advantages and limitations of the worst-case model.
Keywords: structural optimization, instability, buckling, two-scale, cellular materials

1 Introduction
The ongoing progress in additive manufacturing
allows structures with fine details to gain increasing focus. Lattice structures in particular, both
homogeneous and graded, are utilized in many
applications, e.g., thermal management, energy
absorption, noise reduction, biomedical engineering, etc. (Rahman et al. 2022). Lattice infill is also
recognized as potentially increasing global buckling resistance of a component (Clausen et al.
2016). However, fine features are prone to local
buckling (Ferrari and Sigmund 2019).

1

Two-scale optimization (Wu et al. 2021) can
be used to design such structures without the need
to resolve all the fine details of the full design
in a single setting. The idea of this approach
started with the work of Bendsøe and Kikuchi
(1988), in which the design process is divided into
two scales: the macroscopic scale, which describes
the overall component, and the microscopic scale,
which shows the fine details. Bendsøe and Kikuchi
bridged the gap between these two scales by
asymptotic homogenization (Allaire et al. 1997).
This technique yields approximate material properties of microstructures on the macroscopic scale,

which can then be used in macroscopic constitutive equations. Choosing a parameterized
microstructure, Bendsøe and Kikuchi were able
to effectively decouple the scales: Prior to any
optimization procedure a discrete subset of the
parameter space is chosen and homogenization is
conducted for each of the microstructures gained
from this parameter set. The obtained properties
are then interpolated in the continuous parameter space and the interpolated material model
can later be reused to solve various optimization
problems. This technique introduces an interpolation error, but requires less computational effort
when compared with on the fly homogenization,
i.e., homogenization performed for each finite element in the discretized design domain and for
each update step of the design during an iterative
optimization procedure. Moreover the interpolation error can be controlled in a rather straight
forward way during preprocessing.
Though there is exhaustive literature on optimal design considering the buckling behavior of
structures using beam models (Ferrari and Sigmund (2019) and references therein), only a relatively small number of publications for continuum
models exist. The initial problems evolved around
finding optimal cross-sections for columns of fixed
length and weight subject to uniaxial compression
loads (Clausen 1851; Keller 1960; Tadjbakhsh and
Keller 1962; Huang and Sheu 1968; Khot et al.
1976). Neves et al. (1995) were the first to conduct
topology optimization with respect to buckling
based on the method of Bendsøe and Kikuchi
described above. However, they encountered various obstacles in the linear buckling analysis, which
is stated as an eigenvalue problem (Bendsøe and
Sigmund 2003). This includes localized modes in
low density regions and clustering of eigenvalues when approaching the final design (Seyranian
et al. 1994). Actions to alleviate issues with artificial, low-density modes have been proposed, e.g.,
different interpolation schemes for the stiffness
and geometric stiffness matrices (Pedersen 2000;
Bendsøe and Sigmund 2003) or applying an eigenvalue shift based on the last iteration and identifying artificial modes by their contribution to
the total strain energy (Gao and Ma 2015). There
are also methods for avoiding low-density regions
like filtering and projection of the pseudo-density

(Larsen et al. 2018), penalization of intermediate values in the objective (Allaire and Francfort
1993; Allaire and Kohn 1993), or element removal
strategies (Behrou et al. 2021; Dalklint et al. 2020;
Giele et al. 2021). Clustering of eigenvalues can
be prevented by enforcing gaps between the eigenvalues (Bendsøe and Sigmund 2003). However, a
large number of eigenvalues may still have to be
computed to achieve good convergence (Bruyneel
et al. 2008), which compels the use of efficient
eigenproblem solvers (Dunning et al. 2016; Ferrari
and Sigmund 2020). Nevertheless, topology optimization with respect to buckling still currently
poses a challenging problem.
More recently, stability requirements have also
been employed when tailoring microstructures
(Neves et al. 2002b,a; Thomsen et al. 2018; Andersen et al. 2022), though models for the buckling
of periodic microstructures have been investigated
for decades. Homogenization theory for buckling load factors is well established (Neves et al.
2002b; Thomsen et al. 2018), but several challenges still arise in this context. Buckling modes
can range from high-frequency modes with a wavelength shorter than the characteristic size of the
microstructure to modes that span over multiple
periods of the microstructure. Floquet-Bloch theory can be used to capture the latter in particular
(Neves 2019).
For dehomogenized designs scale effects stemming from a finite cell size and effects due to grading of the microstructure might appear (Thomsen
et al. 2018). Especially the latter might lead to
an occurrence of undesired buckling modes at the
boundary of the structure.
The aforementioned works only investigate
the buckling behavior of a structure on a single scale, either macroscopic or microscopic. Even
with the ongoing ”competition for ultimately stiff
and strong architected materials” (Andersen et al.
2021), these designed materials appear not to
have been utilized so far in the optimization of
components with stability requirements.
In this article, we present a two-scale topology optimization approach, where we incorporate
buckling on both scales individually, but neglect
cross-modes spanning over both scales. Assuming
separation of length scales, we use homogenization
theory to upscale the elastic behavior and buckling stability of a periodic lattice that resides on
the microscopic scale. On the macroscopic scale we

search for an optimal lattice grading with respect
to both local and global buckling. We parameterize the lattice by its porosity, precompute homogenized properties for a selected set of porosities,
and obtain a model on the continuous parameter
space by piecewise cubic interpolation. This model
is then used in macroscopic optimization problems
with the local lattice porosity as design variable.
Thus, our method can be classified as a multi-scale
density optimization approach with a parameterized unit cell based on the microstructure porosity
(category V/A in Wu et al. (2021)).
Our contribution is a new approach to integrate the upscaled microscopic buckling information into the optimization. From the macroscopic
local stress, we obtain the buckling response on
the microscale via a worst-case model, which acts
as a safeguard against pure microscopic buckling.
The worst case is realized by reducing the macroscopic local stress to its magnitude for reasons of
computational effort. This comes at the cost of
underestimation of predicted critical loads for the
microstructure.
Recent work by Wang et al. (2021) is close to
our approach. However, they deduce local stress
constraints from the slenderness ratio of the lattice struts, while we directly use upscaled microscopic buckling information. Our approach has the
advantage that essentially arbitrary microstructures can be treated, including those for which a
slenderness ratio could not be uniquely defined.
The work of Christensen et al. (2022) is similar
to ours, with some key differences: They assume
isotropic buckling behavior of the microstructure, while our approach is applicable to arbitrary
microstructures. They also fit a Willam-Warnke
failure criterion to homogenized data, which introduces an approximation error of the local buckling
factor. In contrast, we build a worst-case model
from homogenized data, which also comes with
an approximation error; however, applying a full
interpolation model in lieu of the worst case, it
is possible to render this error negligible (see
Remark 1 in Section 4.1). Moreover, Christensen
et al. (2022) employ a two term interpolation
scheme to interpolate the buckling strength as a
function of the relative porosity, whereas we use
more accurate piecewise cubic interpolation. On
the other hand, our approach is limited to sizing
problems with a lower bound on the lattice density

everywhere, while a major contribution of Christensen et al. (2022) is the possibility to allow for
void regions in the design while still being able to
maintain the lower bound on the density of the
lattice using an auxiliary design field.
In this article, we restrict the analyses to
linear elasticity and linearized buckling, though
the general idea of the method can be extended
to non-linear regimes. We also limit ourselves
to a two-dimensional setting in this article to
keep notations simple. However, it is straightforward to extend our approach to three dimensions.
We emphasize that our method is applicable to
arbitrary, parameterized microstructures. As an
example, we choose a lattice consisting of equilateral triangles that is parameterized by its porosity.
More sophisticated geometries and parameterizations are possible with higher computational effort
without changing the general method.
The remainder of the article is structured as
follows: In Section 2 we recap the state equations
for linear elasticity and linearized buckling analysis. Section 3 briefly presents the main formulas
for asymptotic homogenization of elasticity modulus and buckling load factors. We describe our
exemplary microstructure, its parameterization,
and important aspects for the upscaling process in
Section 4. We present our method for designing a
lattice unit cell by rounding corners of an equilateral triangle, showing finite element convergence
on the microscopic scale, and obtaining homogenized properties of a lattice. Section 4.1 provides
the novel approach to include the upscaled properties on the macroscopic scale via the suggested
worst-case model for the homogenized buckling
load factor. Section 4.2 demonstrates how to
precompute homogenized properties on a discretized parameter space and apply an interpolation scheme to yield values on the continuous
parameter space. Section 5 outlines three different
two-scale optimization problems considering buckling on the macroscopic scale, on the microscopic
scale and on both scales (without cross-modes).
Associated numerical examples are presented in
Section 6 together with a pre-study, which helps to
develop a better understanding of the optimized
designs. A numerical validation on dehomogenized
designs is given in Section 7.1 accompanied by a
study on scale separation. We examine the impact
of the worst-case error closely in Section 7.2 by

means of two numerical examples. Finally, we
complete with conclusions in Section 8.

ce,k = det(Je )we,k

2 Linear elasticity and
buckling analysis
In this section we briefly recap the state equations
for linear elasticity and buckling analysis on an
algebraic level as given by Thomsen et al. (2018).
For continuous formulations in weak form, interested readers are referred to Neves (2019). We
assume a linear elasticity setting and linear bifurcation buckling condition. This means that the
prebuckling displacement, stresses, and strains
vary linearly with the applied load and that the
load factor, which indicates stability, appears linearly in the bifurcation eigenvalue problem. Linear
buckling analysis consists of two steps: First, we
solve the linear elasticity state equation for displacements of a structure under a given load.
Then, an eigenvalue problem is solved, where the
eigenvalues correspond to bifurcation points, and
eigenvectors are interpreted as buckling modes of
deflection.
Throughout this article, we apply Voigt notation for tensors and assume plane stress conditions.
Let us considerSa body Ω ⊂ R2 and its disM
cretization ΩM = e=1 Ωe by M finite elements.
Then the state equation of linear elasticity for ΩM
reads as (Zienkiewicz et al. 2005):
K(ρ)u = f ,

point and contains derivatives of the finite element’s shape functions. The factor

(1)

where u is the sought-for vector of displacements,
ρ ∈ (0, 1]M is the pseudo-density field and f is the
applied load vector (reference load). The stiffness
matrix is given by

contains the Jacobian determinant det(Je ) of element e and the integration weight we,k associated
with the k-th integration point of said element.
The buckling equation is given by the eigenvalue problem,
(K(ρ) − Λ G(ρ, u(ρ))) φ = 0,

K(ρ) =

(4)

and is solved for pairs of eigenvalues Λ` and eigenvectors φ` , ` ≤ M. Eigenvalues of (4) are also
called load factors. The critical load, under which
buckling occurs, can be computed by multiplying the reference load f with the eigenvalue with
the smallest absolute value, which is also known
as the critical load factor or buckling load factor (BLF). If the critical load factor is less than
or equal to one, the structure buckles; otherwise,
the structure is stable with respect to the applied
reference load. The stress stiffness matrix (or geometric stiffness matrix) (Němec et al. 2016) in (4)
is given by
G(ρ, u(ρ)) =
Nip
M X
^

ce,k B̃e,i,k (σe (ue (ρ)))i,j B̃e,j,k ,

(5)

e=1 k=1

where summation over i and j is implied. Again,
ce,k includes the Jacobian determinant of element
e and the integration weight at the k-th integration point. The integrated stress in element e is
numerically evaluated as
σe (ue (ρ)) =

Nip
M X
^

(3)

Nip
X

ce,k E(ρe )Be,k ue (ρ),

(6)

k=1
>
ce,k Be,k
E(ρe )Be,k

(2)

e=1 k=1

V

with assembly operator denoted by and number
of integration points Nip . E(ρe ) is the elasticity
tensor, which depends on the pseudo-density in
element e. Be,k is the strain-displacement matrix
of element e evaluated in the k-th integration

and
k
e
(7)
B̃e,i,k = ∂N
∂xi (x )
is the derivative of the matrix of the shape functions evaluated at integration point xk . Usually,
solutions to (4) are considered ordered according to the absolute value of the load factors with
Λ1 as the smallest value and eigenvectors are
G-normalized, i.e.,

φ> G φ = 1.

(8)

In single-scale topology optimization, (6) can lead
to artificial buckling modes in low density regions
(Neves et al. 1995). However, in our approach the
macroscopic pseudo-density represents the local
relative lattice volume. Thus, low density regions
represent thin lattice, and modes in such regions
are not artificial, but rather comply with buckling
of the lattice.
Following Rodrigues et al. (1995), the sensitivity of an eigenvalue with algebraic multiplicity one
with respect to density ρe is given as




∂Λ
∂G
∂K
>
> ∂K
= φ
−Λ
φ − Λw
u .
∂ρe
∂ρe
∂ρe
∂ρe
(9)
Here, w is the adjoint state obtained from the
solution of the equation
K(ρ) w = φ> ∇u G(ρ, u(ρ)) φ.

(10)

For eigenvalues with multiplicity greater one, the
derivative of the load factor function does not exist
in a strict sense. Nevertheless, using (9) still an
element of the subdifferential can be computed
(Rodrigues et al. 1995). Alternatively, derivations
for multiple eigenvalues can be used (Seyranian
et al. 1994).
Note that G is in general not positive definite,
so sometimes a reformulation of the eigenvalue
problem (4) to

discretization. These modes are usually highly
localized and can be filtered by setting a threshold on the minimal number of nodes that have to
exhibit deflection, e.g., 5% of all nodes in the finite
element mesh.
As we do not perform topology optimization
on the microscopic scale and are only interested
in obtaining the critical load factor of a given
microstructure, sensitivities are not required here
and thus clustering of eigenvalues as described in
the work by Neves et al. (2002a) is not an issue.

3.1 Linear elasticity
We choose a representative volume element (RVE)
Y , which is discretized
with m finite elements
Sm
Ye , i.e., Y =
e=1 Ye . We solve the equilibrium equations on the microscopic scale for the
Y -periodic fields χj using three test fields f j :
Kχj = f j ,

j = 1, 2, 3

(12)

with stiffness matrix K and f j given by
K=

nip
m X
^

>
ce,k Be,k
E 0 Be,k

(13)

e=1 k=1

and

nip
m X
^

j

f =

>
ce,k Be,k
E 0 ˜j .

(14)

e=1 k=1


(11)
G(ρ, u(ρ)) − Λ1 K(ρ) φ = 0,
might be beneficial, as K is always positive definite for ρ > 0.

3 Asymptotic homogenization
To obtain the mechanical properties of a lattice
structure on the macroscopic scale, we perform
asymptotic homogenization. We briefly recall the
homogenization formulas in the two-dimensional
setting, which can be found, e.g., in Thomsen et al.
(2018). Note that we do not perform topology
optimization on the microscopic scale, but rather
investigate given periodic lattice structures. Thus,
there is only a finite element mesh for the solid
material region.
This prevents spurious modes, which typically
arise in low density regions during topology optimization (Neves et al. 1995). However, we might
get artificial modes owing to the finite element

nip is the number of integration points, E 0 is the
elasticity tensor for the base material and ˜j are
unit strain fields with ˜ji = δij . We note that
the Y -periodicity is realized by assuming same
values for the solutions on opposite sides of Y .
The homogenized constitutive tensor E H of the
microstructure is then given by
H
Ei,j
=
m nip
>

1 ^X
ce,k ˜i − Be,k χie E 0 ˜j − Be,k χje .
|Y | e=1
k=1

(15)

3.2 Buckling
The equilibrium equation for buckling on the
microscopic scale is an eigenvalue problem as in
the macroscopic setting (cf. (4)) and is solved for

pairs of eigenvalues λ` and associated eigenvectors
ϕ` , ` ≤ m:
(K − λ G(χ, σ̄))ϕ = 0

(16)

As in the macroscopic setting, the eigenvalue with
the smallest absolute value denotes the buckling
load factor. G is the microscopic initial stress
stiffness matrix (cf. (5))

R2
R1
d

G(χ, σ̄) =
nip
m X
^

>
ce,k B̃e,i,k
(σe (χ, σ̄))i,j B̃e,j,k

(17)

e=1 k=1

with
σe (χ, σ̄) = E 0 (I − Be Xe ) ¯(σ̄).

(18)

The microscopic initial stress tensor σe describes
how the macroscopic strain ¯ is distributed in
unit cell Y . We note that (18) already takes
stress amplification (see Ferrer et al. (2021)) into
account. The macroscopic strain is given as solution of the macroscopic constitutive equation
¯(σ̄) = (E H )−1 σ̄

(19)

and Xe = [χ1e χ2e χ3e ] contains the solutions of
(12). The macroscopic stress σ̄ is obtained via (1)
and (6). Parameterization of the lattice geometry
and linearity of the buckling analysis allows us
to precompute homogenized properties. Thus, we
can avoid solving homogenization problems during
optimization (cf. Section 4.2).
We want to emphasize that the buckling analysis in (4) and (16) yields pure global and pure local
modes, respectively. In particular, cross-modes
spanning over both scales and defined as a solution to Eq. (40) in the work of Neves (2019), are
not detected.

4 Microstructure
parameterization and
upscaling model
In the following section, we present our method to
integrate the microscopic buckling load factor into
a macroscopic scale optimization problem. The
explanation is done for an exemplary lattice structure; however, we would like to stress again that

Fig. 1 Principal design of an equilateral triangular lattice
structure with highlighted unit cell. The lattice geometry
is given by primitive lattice vectors R1 and R2 . For our
enhanced version, see Fig. 8.

the method can be applied to arbitrary base cell
topologies. We first demonstrate an approach to
obtain the homogenized load factors of the lattice.
The exemplary lattice we chose consists of
equilateral triangles with edge length d, as the
principal design of our microstructure. The primitive lattice vectorspare thus given by R1 = (1, 0)>
and R2 = (1/2, (3)/2)> (Fig. 1). This design
is known in literature to provide good macroscopic buckling strength (Clausen et al. 2016).
To get a periodic unit cell, we take two of these
triangles, which together form a parallelogram,
including its shorter diagonal (see Fig. 1). We
parameterize the unit cell by one parameter ρ,
which describes the relative volume or one minus
porosity, respectively. With this parameterization
the homogenization procedures from Section 3 can
be written using two maps:
E H : (0, 1] → S3 ,
3

λ : R × (0, 1] → R,

ρ 7→ E H (ρ),

(20)

(σ̄, ρ) 7→ λ(σ̄, ρ)

(21)

(20) assigns each relative volume ρ a symmetric, positive definite homogenized elasticity tensor
computed from (15), while (21) maps a macroscopic stress and a relative volume to the resulting
homogenized buckling load factor λ(σ̄, ρ) obtained
by solving (16).
As material parameters, we chose a Young’s
modulus of 10 Pa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3.
Next, we present three aspects that are important for the upscaling process: the design of joints
of lattice struts, the resolution of the finite element
mesh on the microscopic level, and the number of

Young’s modulus / Pa

w2
r2
M2
w1
r2
M1
r1

0

20%
30%
40%
50%

0.02

0.04

volume
volume
volume
volume

20%
30%
40%
50%

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

relative corner radius / Fig. 4 Normalized homogenized Young’s modulus for different relative volumes as a function of the radius of
rounded corners. The radius is given relative to a unit cells
edge length d.

1.00
Poisson’s ratio / -

buckling load factor / -

1.0

volume
volume
volume
volume

0

w2

Fig. 2 To prevent stress concentrations, lattice corners
are rounded by circular arcs, which are defined by a given
radius. The figure shows the resulting lattice boundary for
two configurations with different radii r1 and r2 . The arc
midpoint M and lattice strut width w are determined by
the radius via geometric calculations, forcing the relative
volume fraction of the lattice constant.

0.0

0.5

0.0

w1

0.5

1.0

0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80

0

volume
volume
volume
volume

20%
30%
40%
50%

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

relative corner radius / 0.06

0.08

0.1

relative corner radius / Fig. 3 Normalized homogenized buckling load factor for
σ̄) = (−1, 0, 0) and different relative volumes as a function
of the radius of rounded corners. The radius is given relative
to a unit cells edge length d.

unit cells in an RVE. We note that the latter is
automatically covered if a Floquet-Bloch approach
along with a sufficiently fine discretization of the
Brillouin zone is used.

Rounded corners
A unit cell design with sharp corners where the
lattice struts meet leads to local stress concentrations at those corners. To circumvent this issue, we
round the corners with circular arcs with radius r,
while keeping the overall volume of the structure
constant (Fig. 2). A lattice with rounded unit cells
can be seen in Fig. 8.

Fig. 5 Normalized homogenized Poisson’s ratio for different relative volumes as a function of the radius of rounded
corners. The radius is given relative to a unit cells edge
length d.

It turns out that the choice of the radius
parameterizing the arcs has only minor effect on
the Poisson’s ratio (Fig. 5). The Young’s modulus
is affected mainly for small relative lattice volume (Fig. 4); for a small volume, a large radius
leads to very thin lattice struts due to volume
preservation (cf. Fig. 2) and the lattice loses stiffness. The impact on the homogenized buckling
load factor is more significant as can be seen in
Fig. 3. For small radii, the buckling resistance
increases with increasing radius, because stress
concentrations are avoided, lattice struts get better supported, and their relative length to width
ratio gets smaller. For larger radii, the struts get
thinner, their length to width ratio increases, and
the load factor decreases. For different volumes,
the maximum of the smallest buckling load factor is achieved at different radii. The data in

0.0330
0.0279

0.0327

0.0276

0.0324
0

0.5

1

0.0321

number of finite elements / 106
Fig. 6 Homogenized Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio
for different finite element discretizations of an RVE with
a relative volume of 30%.

Fig. 3 suggests that rounding corners with a radius
depending on the volume leads to good buckling
resistance. We note that we only investigated an
uniaxial loading with σ̄) = (−1, 0, 0), and the
optimal radius might be different for other stress
situations. To keep things simple, we thus decided
to use a constant radius of r = 0.05d for our
subsequent calculations.

Finite element convergence on the
microscale
We discretize the microstructure by triangles with
second order shape functions. A convergence study
with respect to the number of finite elements for
homogenization, i.e., on the microscopic scale, can
be seen in Figs. 6 and 7. Observing that the
convergence graphs are already very flat when
approaching one million elements and taking into
account that we want to keep the finite element
error in the preprocessing small, we opt to choose
for all subsequent homogenization procedures a
discretization, which results for a density of ρ =
0.5 in approximately one million finite elements
per RVE. Geometries corresponding to lower densities are resolved using slightly less elements.
Given this number of finite elements, a single analysis is usually completed within a few minutes on
a standard work station.

Choice of RVE size
Asymptotic homogenization can only detect highfrequency modes, i.e., modes with a wave length
that is smaller than the size of the representative volume element. However, buckling modes

buckling load factor / -

0.0282

buckling load factor

0.0284

0.0333
Poisson’s ratio

Young’s modulus / Pa

Young’s modulus
Poisson’s ratio

0.0282
0.0280
0.0278
0.0276
0.0274
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

number of finite elements / 10

1
6

Fig. 7 Homogenized buckling load factor for different
finite element discretizations of an RVE with a relative
volume of 30%.

might span over more than one cell. To identify
these modes also in a homogeneous lattice structure, we encompass more than one unit cell in
the RVE. That is, the microstructure is considered
Y
2
κ -periodic, where κ is the number of unit cells
inside the RVE. RVEs containing various unit cells
can be seen in Fig. 8. It is noted that all modes
of an RVE with a given number κ of cell repetitions can also be found using an RVE comprised
of `κ × `κ unit cells, where ` is an integer number,
e.g., all modes of a 2 × 2 RVE appear also in the
analysis of a 4 × 4 or 6 × 6 RVE. Using an analogous argument, modes with periodicity nκ1 along
R1 and periodicity nκ2 along R2 for n1 , n2 ∈ N are
captured using a κ × κ RVE. Note that in practice
there is a natural lower bound; this value is given
by the resolution of the underlying finite element
discretization.
We observe that especially an RVE with only
one unit cell results in quite high homogenized
load factors. This is because the joint of the struts
gets locked in rotation due to the periodicity of
the RVE. In an RVE with more than one cell
and in the analysis of dehomogenized designs in
Section 7.1, joints of lattice structures are free to
rotate (see Fig. 24).
As we are interested in the smallest, i.e., critical, load factor of the lattice, we pick the minimal
load factor with respect to cell repetitions:
λ(σ̄, ρ) = min λκ (σ̄, ρ)
κ∈N

(22)

y

x
Fig. 8 Different RVEs containing 1x1, 2x2, 3x3 and 4x4
unit cells and the coordinate system for homogenization.

In practice, one is not able to perform homogenization with κ ∈ N cell repetitions, but has to resort
to κ ≤ K with an appropriately chosen upper
bound K on the number of cell repetitions. We
would like to stress that for a given cell layout, the
optimal κ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K} cannot, in general, be
determined without testing essentially all choices
and might even vary for fixed stress σ̄ but different
volume fractions ρ.
We want to remark that the presented method
of repeating the unit cell within the RVE is analogous to applying Floquet-Bloch theory with a
special discretization of the Brillouin zone (see
Fig. 9). In Floquet-Bloch theory, periodicity conditions for modes φ are given as
φ(y + Rj ) = φ(y)eik

>

Fig. 9 Wave vectors in the Brillouin zone (see Thomsen
et al. (2018)), which correspond to homogenization with
1 to 7 cell repetitions in an RVE. Only 7 cell problems
have to be solved to capture all modes corresponding to
the marked wave vectors.

We emphasize that the worst-case model presented in the next Section 4.1 is independent of the
method that is used to obtain the homogenized
buckling load factor.

4.1 Worst-case model
This subsection describes our novel method to
integrate the microscopic buckling load factor on
the macroscopic scale. We stress that it is valid
not only for our exemplary lattice but for any
arbitrary, parameterized microstructure.
Due to linearized buckling analysis ((16)
to (19)) the homogenized load factor depends
linearly on the macroscopic stress:
λ(σ̄, ρ) =

Rj

,

j = 1, 2,

(23)

where i refers to the complex unity, k is the wave
vector, and y is a location inside a lattice unit
cell (Thomsen et al. 2018). Rather than solving
cell problems with boundary conditions (23) for
all k ∈ R2 , in practice a number of k vectors
on the boundary of the so called irreducible Brillouin zone (IBZ) is selected. This corresponds to
a discretization of the IBZ.
Now, a ( nκ1 , nκ2 )-periodic mode with n1 , n2 ≤
κ corresponds to a wave vector, which solves the
system
 >
 
R1
n1
2π
k= κ
.
(24)
n2
R2>
With that, we can plot all wave vectors corresponding to modes, covered by our κ × κ RVEs
with κ from 1 to K, into a Floquet-Bloch diagram
with an outline of the IBZ. Doing so for K = 7,
we obtain the result depicted in Fig. 9.

1
λκ
kσ̄k min
κ∈N





σ̄
kσ̄k , ρ

(25)

That is, homogenization can be conducted with
macroscopic unit stress (in some given norm)
and later, the homogenized load factor has to
be divided by kσ̄k. It is thus sufficient to
examine stresses on the unit sphere surface S 2
instead of the whole three-dimensional stress space
(σxx , σyy , σxy ). We define
λ : S 2 × (0, 1] → R,
λ(σ̄, ρ) = min λκ (σ̄, ρ),
κ∈N

(26)

which assigns a homogenized buckling load factor to each unit stress combined with a relative
volume.
We use a spherical coordinate system to characterize unit stresses on S 2 : the zenith reference
(z-axis) is the axis from the origin through the
biaxial compression stress σ = (−1, −1, 0) and

120◦

biaxial compression
uniaxial compression
shear◦
60
uniaxial
tension

90◦

150◦

30◦

10−3 10−2 10−1 100 0◦
x

180◦

210◦

330◦
240◦

Fig. 10 Representation of unit stresses as a unit sphere
surface (σ̄)xy out of plane axis). Special stress types
form circles (uniaxial/shear stress) or single points (biaxial
stress) on the surface. Unit stresses are parameterized by
spherical coordinates with zenith reference z and azimuthal
reference x.

the azimuth reference (x-axis) is the axis from the
origin through σ = (1, −1, 0) (Fig. 10). In this
coordinate system, biaxial compression and tension stress conform to north and south pole, while
all pure shear stresses rest on the equator. The
inclination (or latitude if thinking of geographical
coordinates) characterizes the type of stress: the
rotation invariant biaxial compression and tension
stresses conform to poles, and other special types,
e.g., uniaxial and shear stresses form circles on
the unit sphere surface (circle of latitude). The
azimuthal angle (longitude) describes the rotation
of the applied macroscopic stress σ̄ relative to the
RVE. For an additional explanation please refer to
the video in Online Resource 1.
Common literature reduces the stress space
even further. Under the assumption of isotropic
buckling behavior, only biaxial loading without
shearing component but varying the σσxx
-ratio is
yy
investigated, or uniaxial loading with all possible load orientations relative to the investigated
microstructure is applied (Bluhm et al. 2020).
In contrast, we compute the buckling yield surface for the whole unit stress surface S 2 . Thus,

300◦

270◦

Fig. 11 Homogenized buckling load factors for an RVE
with 3x3 unit cell repetitions and a relative volume of 30%.
Note the logarithmic scaling of the radial axis. The displayed angle is the azimuthal angle from the spherical reference coordinate system (see Fig. 10) and corresponds to
the rotation of the stress around the RVE. The symmetry
of the unit cell is reflected in the load factors.

our method is applicable to arbitrary, parameterized microstructures with isotropic or anisotropic
buckling properties.
The homogenized load factors for uniaxial
compression, biaxial compression and shear stress
for an RVE with a relative volume of 30% and
three cell repetitions are shown in Fig. 11. We can
clearly see that the symmetry of the unit lattice
cell is reflected in the load factors. The shape of
the uniaxial loading case matches very well with
results by Bluhm et al. (2020).
Next, we coalesce all data in a worst-case
model. Having evaluated homogenized load factors
for different cell repetitions κ ∈ N and all stresses
on the unit stress sphere σ̄ ∈ S 2 , i.e., for all stress
types and directions, we select the smallest buckling load factor with respect to all unit stresses
and number of cell repetitions:
λwc : (0, 1] → R,
λwc (ρ) = min2 λκ (σ̄, ρ)

(27)

σ̄∈S ,
κ∈N

This worst-case model depends only on the local
volume fraction and no longer on the local stress
type or direction. We note that in practice the unit

sphere is discretized and the number of cell repetitions bounded from above. The worst case is thus
only a worst case with respect to the discretization resolution and maximal cell repetitions. We
found, however, that the homogenized buckling
load factors for our exemplary lattice cell have
high regularity with respect to the stress variable.
If homogenized load factors were obtained via
Floquet-Bloch theory (Neves et al. 2002a) instead
of using different cell repetitions, (27) would contain a minimization over all possible wave vectors k in the Brillouin zone B in lieu of cell
repetitions:
λwc (ρ) = min2 λk (σ̄, ρ)

(28)

σ̄∈S ,
k∈B

4.2 Decoupling of micro- and
macroscale
The parameterization of the unit cell allows for
effective decoupling of the micro- and macroscopic
scales (Bendsøe and Kikuchi 1988). That is, we
discretize the parameter space (0, 1] for the relative volume and precompute homogenized properties (elasticity tensor from (15) and microscopic
buckling load factor from (16)) for the resulting
parameter set (see also Section 6). For optimization of structures on the macroscopic scale, we
then apply an interpolation model to these precomputed properties. In other words, we replace
the maps E H (20) and λ (21) by
E I : (0, 1] → S3 ,
I

ρ 7→ E I (ρ),

3

(29)

I

λ : R × (0, 1] → R, (σ̄, ρ) 7→ λ (σ̄, ρ), (30)
where E I and λI are approximations of E H and
λ, respectively.
To construct λI , we interpolate the worst-case
load factors obtained from (27) with respect to the
density variable:
λIwc : (0, 1] → R,

ρ 7→ λIwc (ρ)

(31)

We obtain the worst-case microscopic buckling
load factor associated with macroscopic stress σ̄
by dividing by the norm of this stress (see (25)):
λI : R3 × (0, 1] → R,

(σ̄, ρ) 7→

I
1
kσ̄k λwc (ρ)

(32)

For gradient based optimization, we need
a differentiable interpolation model. Following
Bendsøe and Kikuchi (1988) we apply a piecewise
interpolation strategy. More precisely, we employ
piecewise cubic Hermite interpolation (Birkhoff
et al. 1968) for both, the homogenized elasticity
tensor (29) as well as the buckling load factor
(31). This scheme yields a continuously differentiable approximation that is composed of uniquely
defined cubic polynomials between the provided
data points and is exact at these points. However,
other interpolation schemes using, e.g., tangent
or RAMP (Rational Approximation of Material
Properties, Stolpe and Svanberg (2001)) functionals are possible with the downside of lower
accuracy, especially for high porosity values.
Under the piecewise Hermite approach, E I is
constructed by individual interpolation of each
coefficient of the elasticity tensor. The first order
derivatives of the homogenized elasticity tensor
and homogenized buckling load factor with respect
to ρ are approximated by finite differences. For
the homogenized load factors, we get numerical
issues for high relative volumes. For these volumes,
the unit cell is very resistant to buckling, but
the iterative eigenvalue problem solver (ARPACK,
version 3.7.0 (Lehoucq et al. 1998)) yields artificial modes, which are caused by the buckling of
individual finite elements. Hence, we only interpolate data points below 60% relative volume. At
the boundary of this sample space, second-order
central finite differences are not available, and
thus only quadratic polynomials are used in the
two outer subintervals, i.e., [0, 0.05] and [0.55, 0.6].
For relative volumes above the chosen threshold
of 60% we extrapolate using the quadratic function obtained for the subinterval [0.55, 0.6]. It is
noted, however, that in the optimized designs presented in Section 6 microbuckling occurs only for
significantly lower densities of 60%. The interpolated worst-case model λIwc for the homogenized microscopic buckling load factor is shown in
Fig. 12. The presented interpolation scheme leads
to sufficiently differentiable functions to perform
gradient-based optimization.
The error of the approximated microscopic
buckling load factor λI comprises several individual errors: the error introduced by finite element
discretization on the microscopic level to solve the
homogenization problems, the error arising from

buckling load factor / -

3
,

interpolation ΛIwc
extrapolation
homogenized BLF

2

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

relative volume / Fig. 12 Homogenized worst-case buckling load factors
and the interpolating curve. For high relative volumes,
numerical issues arise (marked by an o). Thus, only values
up to 0.6 are interpolated, and quadratic extrapolation is
applied above.

Section 6. In contrast to topology optimization,
where usually a solid/void design is of interest,
we vary the local lattice volume fraction between
10% and 100%. This corresponds to a scaling of
the width of the lattice struts.
We want to achieve structures that are resistant to given loadings both with respect to their
stiffness and their buckling strength. To maximize buckling strength in our two-scale approach,
we have to take into account buckling of the
homogenized overall component as well as buckling of the microstructure. This leads to a multiobjective optimization problem. For a macroscopic
domain, discretized by M finite elements, it can
be stated that in terms of mechanical compliance
c, macroscopic load factors Λ` , ` = 1, . . . , L and
microscopic buckling load factors λIe , e = 1, . . . , M:


max g −c, Λ1 , . . . , ΛL , λI1 , . . . , λIM (ρ).

ρ∈Uad

restriction to the worst case, and the error resulting from the interpolation. The discretization and
interpolation errors can easily be controlled by
using finer finite element meshes on the microscopic scale and finer interpolation grids. Thus,
the worst-case error has the highest significance.
We will come back to this when we discuss numerical examples in Section 7.2.
Remark 1 The worst-case error can be avoided if the
worst-case model (27) and univariate interpolation
(31) are replaced by a discretization and trivariate interpolation of (26) in the combined stress and
density space S 2 × (0, 1].
In gradient-based optimization context, a continuously differentiable interpolation scheme is essential.
Possible techniques to realize that for this worst-case
free approach include piecewise cubic Hermite interpolation (Birkhoff et al. 1968) or interpolation on
sparse grids based on cubic B-splines (Valentin et al.
2020). When applying the worst-case free approach
in a three-dimensional setting, due to the curse of
dimensionality, the differentiable sparse grid approach
is preferable, as stress has six independent entries
there, which result in five parameters to represent unit
stress, requiring interpolation to be carried out in a
six dimensional space.

5 Sizing optimization
In this section, we formulate two-scale sizing
optimization problems, which will be solved in

(33)

The macroscopic load factors are given as solutions of (4) and a prediction for the microscopic buckling load factor λIe for each element
e is obtained from the interpolated worst-case
model (32). The design variable ρ represents the
local volume fraction of the homogenized lattice. Via the homogenization formulas, this can
be mapped to mechanical properties of a (periodic) microstructure, e.g., elasticity tensor (15)
and buckling load factor (32), which uses (16). g is
an aggregating function and Uad is the admissible
set
(
)
M
X
Uad = ρ ∈ RM : ρmin ≤ ρe ≤ 1,
ρe ≤ V .
e=1

(34)
We include the first few L  M macroscopic
load factors in the objective to handle potential
mode switching and multiple eigenvalues. Note
that minimization of the compliance corresponds
to maximization of its negative value. We treat the
multi-objective problem (33) with the -constraint
method (Mavrotas 2009). In this, a point on the
Pareto front is obtained by solving the following
problem:


max g̃ Λ1 , . . . , ΛL , λI1 , . . . , λIM (ρ),

ρ∈Uad

s. t. c(ρ) = c0 ,

(35)

with an imposed compliance value c0 .
We want to maximize the smallest load factor to achieve a good buckling strength and thus
choose g̃ to be the min function. To get rid of
the non-smooth character of the latter, we apply
a bound formulation of this problem, as suggested
by Bendsøe and Sigmund (2003), and end up with
the following optimization problem:
max

s∈R,ρ∈Uad

s,

(36)

s. t. Λ` (ρ) ≥ s,

` = 1, . . . , L

(37)

λIe (ρ)

e = 1, . . . , M

(38)

≥ s,

c(ρ) = c0 ,

(39)

With the bound formulation we experienced no
problems with multiple eigenvalues or clustering of eigenvalues in our numerical experiments,
if L was chosen sufficiently large. Alternatively,
other formulations like a smooth minimum via
Kreisselmeier and Steinhauser (1980) could be
considered.
In Section 6.2, we look at three variations of
this problem:
A) We ignore (38), i.e., we maximize buckling
on the macroscopic scale with a compliance
constraint but do not take buckling on the
microscopic scale into account during optimization.
B) We drop (37), i.e., we only optimize microscopic buckling under a compliance constraint but disregard macroscopic buckling.
C) We investigate the problem as given, i.e.,
we maximize buckling on both scales with
respect to a given compliance.
We compute a representation of the Pareto optimal set with 51 Pareto optimized solutions for
each case. For this, we first compute a solution to
the pure compliance minimization problem
c∗ = arg min c(ρ).

(40)

ρ∈Uad

Then we solve A) - C) without the compliance
constraint (39) and evaluate the compliance values
cA , cB and cC of the resulting designs to get the
extreme points on the Pareto set. Afterwards, we
discretize the intervals [c∗ , cA ], [c∗ , cB ] and [c∗ , cC ]
equidistantly, e.g., for A)
cj0 = c∗ + j (cA − c∗ )/50,

j = 0, . . . , 50.

(41)

The representation of the Pareto optimal set is
then given by solutions to A) - C) with compliance
constraint c(ρ) = cj0 in (39).

6 Numerical examples
In this section we present the results of numerical experiments for the two-scale sizing problems stated in Section 5. We first conduct a
pre-study to develop a better understanding of
later optimized designs. After that, solutions to
the multi-objective optimization problems will be
investigated.
To construct the worst-case model, we have
to conduct buckling homogenization with applied
macroscopic stress. For this, we discretize the unit
stress sphere in a spherical coordinate system (see
Section 4.1). We discretize the azimuthal angle,
which describes the rotation of the applied stress
around the RVE, with 5◦ steps. Exploiting the
symmetry of our unit cell, it suffices to investigate the interval from 0◦ to 30◦ degrees. For the
inclination, which describes the type of stress, we
choose 11.25◦ steps in the interval [0◦ , 180◦ ). We
discretize the relative volume with 0.05 steps and
solve homogenization problems for four, five, six,
and seven cell repetitions. Modes obtained with
an RVE consisting of two and three unit cells can
also be detected in an RVE with six unit cell repetitions. Likewise, the modes for an 1x1 RVE are
covered by all other RVEs (see Section 4). This
leads to 448 cell problems for each chosen relative
volume and 9408 in total. Note that these simulations are independent of each other and can be run
in parallel. We discretize the microscopic domain
by approximately one million finite elements per
RVE. As already mentioned in Section 4, the
material properties are given by a Young’s modulus of 10 Pa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3. It is noted
that the motivation for the choice of the Young’s
modulus was an improved numerical behaviour, in
particular when solving the associated eigenvalue
problem on the microscopic scale. Conversely, the
results are invariant with respect to this choice.
The eigenvalue problems are solved by
ARPACK, version 3.7.0 (Lehoucq et al. 1998). To
solve optimization problems, we apply SNOPT,
version 7.2.8 (Gill et al. 2005), which employs a
sequential quadratic programming method.
Now, consider the setting shown in Fig. 13,
left. A rectangular design domain is subject to a

relative local volume ρ

1

Fig. 14 Left: buckling mode of a solid column. Center:
column with weak (gray) material and a solid (black) reinforcement in endoskeleton configuration. Right: exoskeleton configuration. The force is applied via a stiff plate at
the top (red).

6.1 Pre-study: Endoskeleton versus
exoskeleton

0

Fig. 13 Left: macroscopic design setting with loadings
and bearings. Right: the solution of a standard compliance
problem (40) in the design domain (dashed).

pressure load at the top. At the bottom rolling
boundary conditions are applied, i.e., the degree
of freedom in horizontal direction is fixed for all
nodes at the bottom edge. To prevent rigid body
movement, the degree of freedom in vertical direction is also fixed for the central node at the bottom
edge. This corresponds to Euler’s case of a slender column with fixed/free boundary conditions,
for which the buckling load is given by
fcrit =

π2
4L2 EI,

(42)

where L is the length of the column, E is the elastic modulus and I is the planar second moment of
area. The design domain has a ratio of 1 : 5.2 and
we discretize it with 25 × 130 bi-linear quadrilateral elements (Q4 ), which is a sufficient resolution
for this type of element (compare also (Ferrari
and Sigmund 2019, Fig. 1)). Fig. 13 shows the
optimized design of a mechanical compliance minimization with a SIMP (Solid Isotropic Material
with Penalization) material model and a lower
physical design bound of 1e−9.

Before we look into results of the optimization
problems, we perform a study to develop a better understanding of later optimized designs. As a
first step, consider ρ = 1 on Ω, i.e., solid material
everywhere (Fig. 14, left). Assuming plane stress
conditions, a width and virtual depth of 1 m each,
length 5.2 m and E = 10 Pa, we get fcrit = 0.076 N
from (42). This fits well to our numerical result
of fcrit = 0.074 N. Next, we compare this solid
column with two structures that have the same
weight each as the solid column: weak material
(ρ = 0.4) with either a solid reinforcement (ρ = 1)
of width 0.5 m centered in the middle (endoskeleton, Fig. 14, mid) or a solid reinforcement that
flanks the weak material at both sides with width
0.25 m (exoskeleton, Fig. 14, right). The force is
applied at the top boundary via a solid plate with
an elastic modulus that is 100 times higher than
the solid material. As the weight is kept constant, these two structures are wider than the first
one (their width is 1.75 m). The critical loads are
0.065 N and 0.22 N, respectively. Due to a larger
second moment of inertia, the exoskeleton shows
superior macroscopic buckling stiffness compared
to the endoskeleton. Thus, we expect designs
that are optimized with respect to macroscopic
buckling to exhibit an exoskeleton-like structure.

6.2 Optimization
Next, we investigate the three different multiobjective optimization problems as given in
Section 5. Let us briefly note that we did not

In the second optimization problem, we ignore
macroscopic buckling and instead maximize the
smallest microscopic load factor of all finite elements (38) subject to a compliance constraint.

A4

0.2
0.15

0.03

0.1

0.02
macro. BLF
min ρe

0.01
1

c∗

1.4

1.6

0.05

0
cA 1.8

minimal local volume ρe / -

A3

0.04

A) Pure macroscopic load factor
optimization

B) Pure microscopic load factor
optimization

A2

0.05

0

compliance / Nm
Fig. 15 Optimized function values considering only
macroscopic buckling subject to a compliance and a global
volume constraint. As reference, we include a topology
optimization result (TO) for pure compliance minimization with ρmin = 0.001 with compliance 1.10 Nm and load
factor 0.014. Selected designs are shown in Fig. 16.

1

local volume / -

Ignoring buckling on the microscopic scale, we
maximize the macroscopic load factor (37). The
load factors for different values of the compliance
constraint can be seen in Fig. 15. As reference,
we include the value of a topology optimization
with power law (ρ3 ) and ρmin = 0.001. Selected
designs are shown in Fig. 16. Design A1 results
from a compliance minimization without considering buckling. Relaxing the compliance constraint
while maximizing the buckling load factor, we only
see a rather small improvement of up to 15% in the
macroscopic load factor. This is due to design A1
having already a rather good macroscopic buckling resistance, as it forms an exoskeleton. Only
in the upper part of the design domain, where the
loaded edge has to be supported, is this alleviated
in favor of a typical branching structure. With
a larger compliance, bound diagonal bars appear
(A2 -A4 ), which are known to increase macroscopic
buckling stability (Bendsøe and Sigmund 2003).
The lower design bound of ρmin = 10% is active
for all designs, see Fig. 15. We conclude from this,
that the load factor could potentially be larger,
i.e., better structures could be obtained, if we
chose a lower ρmin . On the other hand, for very
low ρmin , the problem would no longer be a sizing but rather a topology optimization problem,
which would require special handling (see, e.g.,
Christensen et al. (2022)).

TO A1

0.06
buckling load factor / -

run into the problem of switching eigenvalues
in any of the following examples. The material
models are given by the interpolation functions
from Section 4.1 and a density filter (Borrvall
and Petersson 2001) is applied with a radius of
1.6 times the edge length of a finite element for
regularization purpose. We choose ρmin = 10%
to obtain easily realizable lattice structures and
apply a global volume constraint with V = 50%
of the design domain’s area.

0
A1

A2

A3

A4

Fig. 16 Optimized designs for the marked data in Fig. 15.
From left to right the compliance constraint is relaxed and
macroscopic buckling stiffness increases through appearance of reinforcing, diagonal structures.

The microscopic buckling load factors are approximated by our worst-case model (32). In Fig. 17,
a substantial improvement of the load factor can
be seen when the compliance constraint is relaxed.
The optimal solution for the problem without
compliance constraint (design B5 ) is a fully homogeneous design (see Fig. 18). Design B5 exhibits
homogeneous stress under the given boundary
conditions, which results in a homogeneous microscopic load factor. Thus, the further we relax the
compliance constraint, the more homogeneous the

buckling load factor / -

B2

B3

B4

0.5
0.15

0.4
0.3

0.1

0.2
0.05
0

micro. BLF
min ρe
1

c∗ 1.3

1.6

1.9

C) Simultaneous optimization of pure
macro- and microscopic load factors

B5

cB

0.1
0

minimal local volume ρe / -

B1

0.2

compliance / Nm
Fig. 17 Optimized function values considering only
microscopic buckling subject to a compliance and a global
volume constraint. The optimized designs show increasing
minimal local volume (see also Fig. 18), which yields better
local buckling resistance.

local volume / -

1

0
B2

B3

B4

B5

Fig. 18 Optimized designs for the marked data in Fig. 17.
Design B1 equals A1 in Fig. 16. B5 is pure maximization
of microscopic buckling without compliance constraint and
yields a homogeneous design.

optimized design becomes. First, the branching
structure at the top of design B1 =A1 is replaced
by lattice with high density (B2 ,B3 ), then the load
carrying skeleton vanishes (B4 ,B5 ). The jumps in
the minimal volume in Fig. 17 can be explained by
design changes and the discretization of the design
domain, e.g., between B3 and B4 , the solid parts
on the left and right edge each become one finite
element thinner, which leads to a different stress
distribution in the whole structure.

The obtained values for the simultaneous optimization of both macroscopic and microscopic
buckling load factors (36)-(39) can be seen in
Fig. 19. As reference, the values of a topology
optimization (TO) with ρ = 0.001 are given. To
achieve a stiff (small compliance) design, thick
solid structures are needed. Little material is left
for the lattice part, which results in low local
volume and a small minimal microscopic buckling load factor. Hence, only (38) and (39) are
active and (37) remains inactive. For less restrictive (larger) compliance bounds, less solid material
is necessary and material is redistributed to the
lattice region (C2 ). Thus, the microscopic buckling load factor can be improved. When it reaches
the value of the macroscopic one, (37) becomes
active (C3 ). Therefore, raising only the microscopic buckling load factor further, i.e., steering
towards homogeneous design as in B, yields no
improvement in the objective, as the macroscopic
load factor will define the value of the slack variable. For this reason, both micro- and macroscopic
buckling load factors are raised simultaneously:
the first by increasing the lattice density especially
in the upper region of the design domain and the
second by stiffening the exoskeleton (C4 ,C5 ).
The decreasing minimal local volume in
Fig. 19 for more relaxed compliance appears nonintuitive. In Fig. 20, staircase structures on the
solid parts can be seen due to discretization, see,
e.g., C5 . The resulting local stress field allows
a slightly lower volume for individual finite elements, while preserving the microscopic buckling
load factor.

7 Dehomogenization and
validation
In this section, we want to give two distinct comparisons: First, we compare the predicted buckling
behavior with high-resolution numerical analyses
of dehomogenized designs. Second, we validate the
worst-case model against a precise microscopic
load factor evaluation.

0.3

0.05

0.25

0.04

0.2

0.03

0.15

0.02

macro. BLF
micro. BLF
min ρe

0.01
0

c∗

1

1.3

1.4

cC

0.1
0.05
0

0.06

local volume / -

1

0
C4

1.8
1.7

0.055
1.6
C4

0.045

Fig. 19 Optimized function values of concurrent load factor maximization of pure macro- and pure microscopic
buckling with compliance and volume constraint (36)-(39).
Up to compliance 1.33, only the microscopic buckling load
factor is active. For higher compliance values, the macroscopic buckling load factor dominates. Selected designs are
shown in Fig. 20.

C3

micro. BLF
compliance

1.5

compliance / Nm

C2

macro. BLF
interior LF

C5

Fig. 20 Optimized designs for the marked data in Fig. 19.
Design C1 equals A1 in Fig. 16. To increase microscopic
buckling resistance, the optimizer reduces lattice porosity.
No diagonal bars appear as they do in the pure macroscopic
buckling optimization, since the lattice already provides
good macroscopic buckling resistance. Due to discretization, steps can be seen on the solid parts, as marked in C5
by white ellipses.

7.1 Performance of dehomogenized
designs
The number of lattice cells for dehomogenization
of optimized results is chosen independently of
the finite element resolution of the macroscopic
model (cf. Fig. 13). To realize this, we proceed as

compliance / Nm

C5

load factor / -

buckling load factor / -

C2 C3 C4

minimal local volume ρe / -

TO C1

0.06

C4
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
number of horizontal lattice cells

Fig. 21 Dehomogenization of design C4 with increasing
number of lattice cells. For the interior microscopic load
factor, we searched for the first buckling mode that has
no deflection at the boundary. The macroscopic buckling
load factor matches our prediction well; the microscopic
and the interior load factors are better than predicted by
the worst-case model (cf. Fig. 19).

follows: First, the optimized density field ρ is interpolated and the number of lattice cells is chosen.
Then, an evaluation of this field at each lattice
cell’s center defines the width of the corresponding lattice struts. Note that our dehomogenization
procedure is volume preserving, i.e., all dehomogenized designs have a volume of V = 50% of the
design domain’s area. Dehomogenized designs are
shown in Figs. 22 and 23.

Influence of cell size
We compare dehomogenizations with different cell
sizes for design C4 from Fig. 20. We investigate
different buckling load factors: the one associated
with a macroscopic buckling mode, i.e., deflection of the structure as a whole (low-frequency),
and the one associated with a microscopic mode,
i.e., deflection of the lattice (high-frequency). As
expected, the predicted macroscopic buckling load
factor is met better with a higher number of lattice cells (see Fig. 21). The microscopic buckling
load factor stems from modes at the boundary
(Fig. 23). These modes cannot be approximated
well by homogenization theory, which ignores
boundary effects. We therefore also search for the
smallest load factor associated with an interior
mode, i.e., a mode, that does not exhibit deflection
at the structure’s boundary (cf. Fig. 23). In order
to avoid buckling of the microstructure occurring
at the structural boundary, a coating strategy as

Fig. 22 Dehomogenization of design C4 with 6 (left) and
12 (right) cells in horizontal direction with visualized prebuckling displacement. The horizontal struts at the top face
where the pressure load is applied exhibit sag, which is
reduced for a higher number of cells.

suggested by Christensen et al. (2022) may be
pursued.
In the considered example, the cell size has
almost no influence on this interior load factor.
This might differ for other examples. Zooms for
interior microscopic buckling modes are given in
Fig. 24.
As can be seen in Fig. 21, the compliance tends
to decrease with smaller cell size. The observed
increase for 22 lattice cells compared to 20 is presumably caused by discretization effects. Fig. 22
shows that the displacement under the applied
pressure load has a wave shape, where horizontal lattice struts at the top face sag between their
diagonal supports. The more cells we have, the
better these struts are supported, and thus the
compliance is reduced.

Comparison between homogenized and
dehomogenized designs
Next, we compare the homogenized design C4 with
its dehomogenized counterpart with 20 cells in a
horizontal direction. For this design, we have a
clear separation of length scales and only a small
homogenization error. The macroscopic load factor is determined to be 0.0507 and differs by less

Fig. 23 Different buckling modes for design C4 dehomogenized with eight lattice cells (cf. Fig. 21). Left: first
macroscopic mode. Center: first microscopic mode. Right:
first interior mode.

Fig. 24 Zoom of first interior buckling mode of design C4
dehomogenized with 8 (left), 12 (middle) and 16 (right)
lattice cells (cf. Fig. 21).

than 1% from the predicted macroscopic load factor of 0.0511 in the optimized homogenized design.
A gap of 10% exists between the interior microscopic load factor of the dehomogenized design
of 0.0563 and the predicted one of 0.0511. This
is expected, as the predicted microscopic load
factor is based on our worst-case model, which
assumes the worst stress type and orientation
(see Section 4.1). Note that the predicted microscopic buckling load factor is smaller than the
microscopic buckling load factor, and hence our
worst-case model acts as a safeguard against pure
microscopic buckling in this example. Of course,
such an observation is generally only valid up to

Fig. 26 Setting for shear stress example, consisting of
homogenized lattice with 50% porosity. The color shows the
norm of the resulting mechanical stress. Region C exhibits
shear, region A uniaxial tension, and region B uniaxial
compression stress.

Fig. 25 Left: microscopic buckling load factor predicted
by the worst-case model. Right: visualization of a posteriori
homogenized microscopic buckling load factor. Load factors
are thresholded at 0.1. The marked finite element in the
upper region corresponds roughly to the center of the mode
from Fig. 24. The a posteriori homogenized buckling load
factor of this element is 13% larger than predicted and
differs less than 3% from the dehomogenized design.

remaining discretization and interpolation errors
as well as the error introduced by homogenization.

7.2 Impact of worst-case model
Next, we investigate the gap between the load
factor predicted by the worst-case model and
the interior load factor obtained from the dehomogenized design. For all finite elements in the
lattice region of design C4 , we perform a posteriori
homogenization by evaluation of (26). We extract
the local relative volume and create RVEs with
κ ∈ {4, 5, 6, 7} unit cell repetitions. Then, we conduct homogenization (Section 3) of the buckling
load factor for each κ with the ”real” macroscopic
stress taken from the optimized design using (18)
and (19) and use the minimal value with respect
to κ. The resulting microscopic load factors are
shown in Fig. 25. The mean relative difference
between predicted and a posteriori load factor for
all of the validated finite elements is 18%, with a
standard deviation of 0.079.

The marked element in Fig. 25 complies with
the center of the interior microscopic mode in
the dehomogenized design. For this element, the
a posteriori homogenized buckling load factor is
0.0578, which differs less than 3% from the interior microscopic load factor of the dehomogenized
design. This rather small difference demonstrates
that homogenization is a valid tool for predicting
microscopic buckling behavior.
The a posteriori homogenized buckling load
factor for the mentioned element is 13% larger
than predicted by the worst-case model. This can
be explained by Fig. 11. The macroscopic stress for
the chosen finite element, which is extracted from
the macroscopic analysis, is uniaxial and acts in
vertical direction. Thus, the a posteriori load factor corresponds to the point on the uniaxial curve
at 90◦ , which is 15% larger than the biaxial value.

Example with tension, compression,
and shear stress
In the previously considered example, we mostly
observe uniaxial compression stress. Next, we
want to examine an example with compression,
tension, and shear stress. For this, consider the
setting shown in Fig. 26: A bow-tie shaped domain
is fixed at the left edge in both degrees of freedom. At the right edge, movement in a horizontal
direction is prevented and a force is pulling downwards. We simulate the behavior of a homogenized
lattice with a constant relative local volume, i.e.,

C

B

A

Fig. 27 Microscopic buckling load factors obtained via
our worst-case model.

ρe = 0.5 for all e = 1, . . . , M. This leads to pure
shear stress in the center of the domain, marked
by C, uniaxial tension stress in the regions marked
with A, and uniaxial compression stress in regions
marked with B.
In Fig. 27 we see, that the microscopic buckling
load factor, which is obtained from our worstcase model, has its minimal value in regions A
and B where the highest stress occurs. This highlights a drawback of the worst-case approach: the
model cannot distinguish between tension and
compression stress. This is because it is based
on a minimization over all unit stresses and only
depends on the local volume fraction and local
stress magnitude but not on stress type or direction (cf. (27)). As for our exemplary lattice, the
computed load factors for compression stress are
consistently smaller than for tension stress (see
also (Christensen et al. 2022, Fig. 3) for a confirmation of this observation), and buckling load
factors will always be underestimated by the
model in regions of tension stress. This results
in higher lattice volume fraction than actually
necessary to prevent local buckling at these locations. Due to this expendable lattice over-sizing,
microscopic buckling is not observed at the corresponding locations for the dehomogenized design,
although predicted by the worst-case model.
As in the previous example, we conduct a
posteriori homogenization with the ”real” macroscopic stress taken from the simulated design in
Fig. 26. Fig. 28 shows that in the region of compression stress (B), the error of the prediction is
quite low, but in the region of tension stress (A),
the worst-case model clearly underestimates the

A

B
C

B

A

relative error / -

B

a posteriori load factor / -

A

Fig. 28 Left: microscopic buckling load factors obtained
by a posteriori homogenization with the “real” macroscopic
stress. Right: relative difference of load factors predicted
by the worst-case model compared with a posteriori load
factors. The center region C is subject to pure shear stress
and has a predicted load factor, which is 50% smaller than
the one obtained by a posteriori homogenization.

actual load factor. For an exemplary finite element
in the marked region C, the predicted buckling
load factor is 0.100, while the homogenized value is
0.154. Thus, this element actually has 50% higher
buckling strength than predicted by the worst-case
model. This can be explained by Fig. 29. The load
factor for shear stress at 45◦ , which is the acting stress in the inspected element, is around 50%
larger than the load factor for biaxial stress, on
which our worst-case model is based. This explanation also leads to a simple a priori error estimate
for the worst-case model: if we know the type
of stress, the error is bounded by the difference
between the maximal load factor on the curve for
the specific stress type and the load factor for
biaxial stress.
For this last example, we showed a homogeneous design with non-homogeneous microscopic
buckling load factor. In a simultaneous optimization of both macro- and microscopic buckling
(cf. problem C in Section 5), only the microscopic
constraint is active as the structure exhibits a
comparatively high macroscopic buckling load factor. Optimization with respect to only microscopic
buckling (problem B) leads to non-homogeneous
lattice with homogeneous microscopic buckling
load factor. For this optimized design, similar
deviations in the predicted worst case versus the
a posteriori buckling load factor have been found
in regions that exhibit shear stress.

120◦

90◦

biaxial compression
uniaxial
compression
60◦
shear

150◦

30◦

0.00

180◦

0.05

210◦

0◦
x

330◦
240◦

270◦

300◦

Fig. 29 Homogenized buckling load factors for an RVE
with 3x3 unit cell repetitions and a relative volume of 30%
(cf. Fig. 11). In region C of our example (Fig. 26), we have
shear stress acting at an angle of 45◦ . The buckling load
factor for this stress situation (marked by a circle) is around
50% larger than the one for biaxial compression stress.

We recall that our worst-case model acts as a
safeguard against pure microscopic buckling. The
possibly excessive underestimation of the microscopic buckling load factor can lead to oversized
lattice struts. This can be overcome by replacing
the worst-case approach with other interpolation
models, e.g., a C 1 -Interpolation in the threedimensional parameter space (ρ, σ̄)|σ̄∈S 2 . However, this comes with additional computational
effort for the worst-case model and, as mentioned
in Remark 1 in Section 4.1, requires sophisticated
interpolation schemes if the proposed method is
applied for three-dimensional structures, as the
parameter space will become higher dimensional.

8 Conclusion
We presented a method to perform two-scale optimization of lattice structures while accounting for
buckling on both scales using asymptotic homogenization. Based on a parameterization of our
chosen lattice structure, we obtained homogenized
elastic and buckling properties. We constructed
a worst-case model for the homogenized buckling
load factor (Section 4.1). Both elastic and buckling characteristics were upscaled by individual,
continuously differentiable interpolation models.
We provided numerical examples for optimization

of only macroscopic or microscopic buckling and
simultaneous optimization of both.
We demonstrated that our method to obtain
homogenized properties is equivalent to a special
discretization of the Brillouin zone in FloquetBloch theory. We showed that rounding corners
can have a considerable influence on the buckling strength of lattices, as it prevents stress
concentrations.
We compared the performance of optimized
designs predicted by the worst-case model with
their dehomogenized counterparts. Compliance
and macroscopic buckling were predicted very
well; the predicted microscopic buckling load factor was conservative. We explained the reason
for a possible underestimation and how this can
be avoided by replacing the worst-case model by
interpolation in the whole parameter space. A posteriori homogenization matched dehomogenized
results quite well. This shows that homogenization
is a viable tool to upscale the buckling behavior
of lattice structures.
Although we limit ourselves to a twodimensional setting in this article, an extension
to three dimensions is straight forward. Further
research could include the combination of lattice,
solid, and void design in optimization problems
while accounting for manufacturing constraints.
Acknowledgments. Funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) – Project-ID 61375930 – SFB 814 ”Additive Manufacturing” TP C02.

Declarations
Competing interests On behalf of all authors, the
corresponding author states that there is no
conflict of interest.
Replication of results The numerical implementation of the presented approach is based on
and extends the open-source finite element
package openCFS (Verein zur Förderung der
Software openCFS). The presented numerical examples can be reproduced following the
general openCFS instructions. Examples on
how to conduct homogenization and buckling analysis are provided in its Testsuite.
Finite element meshes have been generated
by Coreform Cubit 2022.4 (Coreform LLC).
Additional scripts for post-processing of the

homogenized data are readily provided by the
authors on request.

References

Birkhoff G, Schultz MH, Varga RS (1968) Piecewise hermite interpolation in one and two variables with applications to partial differential
equations. Numer Math 11(3):232–256

Allaire G, Francfort G (1993) A numerical algorithm for topology and shape optimization.
In: Topology design of structures. Springer, p
239–248

Bluhm GL, Sigmund O, Wang F, et al. (2020)
Nonlinear compressive stability of hyperelastic
2d lattices at finite volume fractions. Journal of
the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 137:103,851

Allaire G, Kohn RV (1993) Explicit optimal
bounds on the elastic energy of a two-phase
composite in two space dimensions. Quarterly
of Applied Mathematics 51(4):675–699

Borrvall T, Petersson J (2001) Topology optimization using regularized intermediate density control. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering 190(37-38):4911–4928. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0045-7825(00)00356-X

Allaire G, Bonnetier E, Francfort G, et al. (1997)
Shape optimization by the homogenization
method. Numerische Mathematik 76(1):27–68.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s002110050253
Andersen MN, Wang F, Sigmund O (2021) On
the competition for ultimately stiff and strong
architected materials. Materials & Design
198:109,356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.
2020.109356
Andersen MN, Wang Y, Wang F, et al. (2022)
Buckling and yield strength estimation of architected materials under arbitrary loads. International Journal of Solids and Structures p
111842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2022.
111842
Behrou R, Lotfi R, Carstensen JV, et al. (2021)
Revisiting element removal for density-based
structural topology optimization with reintroduction by heaviside projection. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 380:113,799. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.
2021.113799
Bendsøe MP, Kikuchi N (1988) Generating optimal topologies in structural
design using a homogenization method.
Computer methods in applied mechanics
and
engineering
71(2):197–224.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-7825(88)90086-2
Bendsøe MP, Sigmund O (2003) Topology optimization: theory, methods, and applications.
Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin Heidelberg New York

Bruyneel M, Colson B, Remouchamps A (2008)
Discussion on some convergence problems in
buckling optimisation. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 35(2):181–186. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00158-007-0129-z
Christensen CF, Wang F, Sigmund O (2022) Multiscale topology optimization considering local
and global buckling response. arXiv preprint
arXiv:221011477
Clausen A, Aage N, Sigmund O (2016) Exploiting additive manufacturing infill in topology
optimization for improved buckling load. Engineering 2(2):250–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.ENG.2016.02.006
Clausen T (1851) Über die form architektonischer säulen. Bull cl, Physico Math Acad St
Pétersbourg 9:369–380
Coreform LLC, Orem, UT Coreform cubit. https:
//coreform.com/products/coreform-cubit/
Dalklint A, Wallin M, Tortorelli DA (2020)
Eigenfrequency constrained topology optimization of finite strain hyperelastic structures.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 61(6):2577–2594. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00158-020-02557-9
Dunning PD, Ovtchinnikov E, Scott J, et al.
(2016) Level-set topology optimization with
many linear buckling constraints using an
efficient and robust eigensolver. International

Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 107(12):1029–1053. https://doi.org/10.
1002/nme.5203
Ferrari F, Sigmund O (2019) Revisiting topology optimization with buckling constraints.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 59(5):1401–1415. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00158-019-02253-3
Ferrari F, Sigmund O (2020) Towards solving
large-scale topology optimization problems with
buckling constraints at the cost of linear analyses. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering 363:112,911. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cma.2020.112911
Ferrer A, Geoffroy-Donders P, Allaire G (2021)
Stress minimization for lattice structures.
part i: Micro-structure design. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
379(2201):20200,109. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2020.0109
Gao X, Ma H (2015) Topology optimization
of continuum structures under buckling constraints. Computers & Structures 157:142–
152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2015.
05.020
Giele R, Groen J, Aage N, et al. (2021) On
approaches for avoiding low-stiffness regions in
variable thickness sheet and homogenizationbased topology optimization. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization 64(1):39–52
Gill PE, Murray W, Saunders MA (2005) Snopt:
An sqp algorithm for large-scale constrained
optimization. SIAM review 47(1):99–131. https:
//doi.org/10.1137/S0036144504446096

Khot N, Venkayya V, Berke L (1976) Optimum
structural design with stability constraints.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering 10(5):1097–1114. https://doi.org/
10.1002/nme.1620100510
Kreisselmeier G, Steinhauser R (1980) Systematic
control design by optimizing a vector performance index. In: Computer aided design of
control systems. Elsevier, p 113–117
Larsen S, Sigmund O, Groen J (2018) Optimal truss and frame design from projected
homogenization-based topology optimization.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
57(4):1461–1474
Lehoucq RB, Sorensen DC, Yang C (1998)
ARPACK users’ guide: solution of large-scale
eigenvalue problems with implicitly restarted
Arnoldi methods. SIAM, Philadelphia
Mavrotas G (2009) Effective implementation of
the ε-constraint method in multi-objective
mathematical programming problems. Applied
mathematics and computation 213(2):455–465.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2009.03.037
Němec I, Trcala M, Ševčı́k I, et al. (2016) New
formula for geometric stiffness matrix calculation. Journal of Applied Mathematics and
Physics 4(4):733–748. https://doi.org/10.4236/
jamp.2016.44084
Neves M, Rodrigues H, Guedes J (1995) Generalized topology design of structures with
a buckling load criterion. Structural optimization 10(2):71–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01743533

Huang N, Sheu CY (1968) Optimal design of an
elastic column of thin-walled cross section. Journal of Applied Mechanics 35(2):285–288. https:
//doi.org/10.1115/1.3601193

Neves MM (2019) Symbolic computation to derive
a linear-elastic buckling theory for solids with
periodic microstructure. International Journal
for Computational Methods in Engineering Science and Mechanics 20(6):523–539

Keller JB (1960) The shape of the strongest
column. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 5(1):275–285. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF00252909

Neves MM, Sigmund O, Bendsøe M (2002a)
Topology optimization of periodic microstructures with a buckling criteria. Vienna University
of Technology

Neves MM, Sigmund O, Bendsøe MP (2002b)
Topology optimization of periodic microstructures with a penalization of highly localized buckling modes. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering 54(6):809–
834. https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.449
Pedersen NL (2000) Maximization of eigenvalues using topology optimization. Structural
and multidisciplinary optimization 20(1):2–11.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s001580050130
Rahman O, Uddin KZ, Muthulingam J, et al.
(2022) Density-graded cellular solids: Mechanics, fabrication, and applications. Advanced
Engineering Materials 24(1):2100,646. https://
doi.org/10.1002/adem.202100646
Rodrigues HC, Guedes J, Bendsøe MP (1995) Necessary conditions for optimal design of structures with a nonsmooth eigenvalue based criterion. Structural optimization 9(1):52–56. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF01742645
Seyranian AP, Lund E, Olhoff N (1994) Multiple
eigenvalues in structural optimization problems.
Structural optimization 8(4):207–227. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF01742705
Stolpe M, Svanberg K (2001) An alternative
interpolation scheme for minimum compliance
topology optimization. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 22(2):116–124. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s001580100129
Tadjbakhsh I, Keller J (1962) Strongest columns
and isoperimetric inequalities for eigenvalues.
Journal of Applied Mechanics 29(1):159–164.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3636448
Thomsen CR, Wang F, Sigmund O (2018) Buckling strength topology optimization of 2d periodic materials based on linearized bifurcation analysis. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 339:115–136. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2018.04.031
Valentin J, Hübner D, Stingl M, et al. (2020)
Gradient-based two-scale topology optimization
with b-splines on sparse grids. SIAM Journal
on Scientific Computing 42(4):B1092–B1114.
https://doi.org/10.1137/19M128822X

Verein zur Förderung der Software openCFS
opencfs. https://opencfs.org/
Wang X, Zhu L, Sun L, et al. (2021) Optimization of graded filleted lattice structures subject
to yield and buckling constraints. Materials &
Design 206:109,746. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2021.109746
Wu J, Sigmund O, Groen JP (2021) Topology
optimization of multi-scale structures: a review.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
63(3):1455–1480
Zienkiewicz OC, Taylor RL, Zhu JZ (2005) The
finite element method: its basis and fundamentals. Elsevier, Amsterdam i.a.

