arXiv:2505.10574v2 [astro-ph.IM] 23 Oct 2025

Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee
Final Report and Recommendations
Gail Zasowski & Saurabh W. Jha (co-Chairs),
Laura Chomiuk, Xiaohui Fan, Ryan Hickox, Dan Huber, Eamonn Kerins, Chip Kobulnicky,
Tod Lauer, Masao Sako, Alice Shapley, Denise Stephens, David Weinberg, and Ben Williams
Ex officio: Lee Armus, Thomas Barclay, Ori Fox, Karoline Gilbert,
Jeff Kruk, Patrick Lowrance, Julie McEnery, and Kristen McQuinn
April 24, 2025

Contents
1 Executive Summary
2 Overview of Roman and the Wide Field Instrument Observing Program
3 Implementation of the Core Community Surveys
3.1 High Latitude Wide Area Survey (HLWAS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 High Latitude Time Domain Survey (HLTDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 General Astrophysics Surveys
5 Process & Timeline
5.1 Committee Empanelment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Meeting Cadence and Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Hybrid Meeting and Finalization of Recommendations . . . . . . . . .
6 Considerations for the Recommendations
6.1 Ongoing Survey Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 External Data Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Retaining Flexibility for General Astrophysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Recommendations amid Change and Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Global Contributions to the Roman WFI Observing Plan
B Works Cited in This Report and the CCS DC Reports
C Core Community Survey Definition Committee Reports
C.1 High Latitude Wide Area Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.2 High Latitude Time Domain Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.3 Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

2
3
7
7
9
12
16
18
18
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
24
25
30
30
68
102

–2–

1.

Executive Summary

The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope is poised to revolutionize our scientific understanding of exoplanets, dark matter, dark energy, and general astrophysics, including through
an innovative community approach to defining and executing sky surveys. The Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee (ROTAC) was convened to recommend time allocations for the three Core Community Surveys (CCS) using the Wide Field Instrument (WFI):
the High Latitude Wide Area Survey (HLWAS), the High Latitude Time Domain Survey
(HLTDS), and the Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS), as well as balance the
time allocation for the General Astrophysics Surveys (GAS).
Each CCS had a corresponding Definition Committee that collected community input and
designed proposals for a nominal (in-guide) survey, as well as underguide and overguide options with smaller and larger time allocations, respectively. These options explored different
ways of fulfilling the mission science requirements while maximizing general astrophysics
science goals enabled by the surveys.
After a thorough review of these reports, the ROTAC recommends:
1. a nominal allocation (520 days) for the HLWAS (§ 3.1, Appendix C.1),
2. a nominal allocation (180 days) for the HLTDS (§ 3.2, Appendix C.2),
3. an overguide allocation (438 days) for the GBTDS with modifications (§ 3.3, Appendix C.3), and
4. 389 days (25.5% of the science operations time) reserved for GAS, including the earlydefinition Galactic Plane Survey (§ 4).

–3–
2.

Overview of Roman and the Wide Field Instrument Observing Program

The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope was the top-ranked scientific priority of the 2010 Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey (National Research Council 2010); it targets the most
compelling questions in contemporary astrophysics, including the demographics of extrasolar planetary systems and the nature of dark matter and dark energy, through wide-field, high-resolution
near-infrared imaging from space. Roman’s Wide Field Instrument (WFI) will have an expansive
0.28 deg2 field of view, sensitivity and resolution comparable to Hubble, and observing modes that
support survey operations roughly 1000 times more efficiently than Hubble. Addressing Roman’s
key science goals by leveraging its observational survey speed led to a strategy for communitydefined and community-driven open surveys, producing fully public data, while retaining flexibility for general astrophysics investigations. Thus, Roman’s WFI observing portfolio will include
large, pre-defined Core Community Surveys (CCS) and a limited set of General Astrophysics Surveys (GAS), defined by a community-led process (Appendix A) and traditional peer-reviewed calls
for proposals, respectively.
Roman’s Core Community Surveys comprise three large projects: the High Latitude Wide Area
Survey (HLWAS; § 3.1), the High Latitude Time Domain Survey (HLTDS; § 3.2), and the Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS; § 3.3). The effort of crafting observational strategies
for each CCS was shepherded by a Definition Committee (DC); each DC designed a nominal,
descoped (underguide), and enhanced (overguide) survey strategy to meet Roman’s science requirements and enable additional science. The Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee
(ROTAC) was charged with reviewing these observational strategies and making time allocation
recommendations for the CCS and the GAS programs. In addition, the Coronagraph Participation
Group will execute an observing program with Roman’s Coronagraph Instrument using 3 months
of observing time during the first 1.5 years after launch; while this is formally a technology demonstration program, we expect that it will have substantial science return as well. The ROTAC charge,
and thus the contents of this report, are limited to the WFI observations.
The footprint of our recommended observing plan is shown in Figure 1, with an illustrative simulated observing timeline in Figure 2 that assumes a realistic launch date of October 20261 . Below
we give a short summary of each CCS and in § 3, our reasoning behind our recommendation for
each design plan. We refer the interested reader to the fuller reports from each survey DC (Appendix C), upon which these summaries are based and which contain far more detail. The ROTAC
is extremely grateful to the DCs for their thoughtful and extensive work on these surveys and
their reports.
1

https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/roman/comm_forum/

–4–
120° 60°

0°

300° 240° 180° 120°

0h

20h

+60°

+30°

0°

−30°

−60°
8h

4h

16h

12h

8h

Figure 1. Equatorial projection of the current footprint of the recommended CCS design options:
HLWAS tiers in light green (wide tier), medium green (medium tier), and dark green (deep tiers);
HLTDS in blue; and GBTDS in yellow (see Figure 4 for a more detailed GBTDS field layout). Also
shown in red is the early-definition Galactic Plane Survey (GPS). The total footprint is here overlaid
on a background stellar density from Gaia. Figure code credit: Javier Sanchez and Saurabh W. Jha,
with assistance from Eli Rykoff and Alex Drlica-Wagner; data credit: ESA/Gaia/DPAC.
The Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS) will observe five 0.28 deg2 fields in the Galactic Bulge and a sixth in the Galactic Center. GBTDS observing will be concentrated in six 72-day
seasons, three early in the mission and three late in the mission. During these seasons, each of
the six fields is observed every 12.1 minutes, in the wide W (F146) filter, with an exposure time
of 67 seconds, and every 12 hours or faster in the Z (F087) and K (F213) filters, with final filter
and cadence choices to be determined through community input. In the four intervening seasons,
fields will be observed every 3–5 days to provide coverage of long timescale events. The GBTDS
will also obtain multiband photometry and grism snapshots of each field for characterization of
its stellar populations. The GBTDS is designed to measure the demographics of exoplanets via
gravitational microlensing, sensitive to a regime of mass and orbital separation that is complementary to those of the Kepler and TESS missions, including free floating planets. The GBTDS will
also detect stars and black holes via microlensing, detect more than 105 transiting planets, measure
asteroseismic masses for over 105 evolved stars, and enable a wide range of other studies of stellar
and Galactic astrophysics.

Resource Use Fraction

–5–

Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey

High Latitude Time Domain Survey

Galactic Plane Survey

High Latitude Wide Area Survey

Not included: Coronagraph Instrument, Calibrations

Day of Year

(yyyy.ddd)

Figure 2. Illustrative simulation of the Roman observing timeline. The GBTDS observes nearly
continuously in the first three Galactic bulge seasons and then again late in the mission. The
HLTDS main survey observes at high cadence during the middle years of the prime mission. The
HLWAS and GPS are scheduled around the time-domain surveys, but all of the programs obtain
data early on in the mission. This timeline will be updated to include observations with the Coronagraph Instrument and Calibrations, and it will shift depending on the actual start date of survey
operations (a late 2026 launch was assumed here). The brief periods when resource demand exceeds availability (>1.0) are largely artifacts here and will be rectified. The remaining available
observing time will be dedicated to General Astrophysics Surveys. Figure credit: Roman Science
Operations Center at STScI.
The High-Latitude Time Domain Survey (HLTDS) will carry out imaging and spectroscopy with
an approximately 5-day cadence over a 2-year duration in the middle of Roman’s 5-year mission.
Imaging will cover a wide tier area of about 18 deg2 in RZYJH (F062, F087, F106, F129, F158)
filters and a deep tier area of about 6.5 deg2 in ZYJHF (F087, F106, F129, F158, F184) filters, with
each tier having both northern and southern fields. Exposure times, ranging from ∼90–300 sec in
the wide tier and ∼300–1600 sec in the deep tier depending on band, are designed to reach S/N
∼ 20 for a typical type-Ia supernova (SN Ia) at maximum light at redshifts z ∼ 0.9 (wide) or z ∼ 1.7
(deep). The prism spectroscopic observations will cover 4.5 deg2 and 0.56 deg2 in the wide and
deep tiers, respectively, providing redshifts and classifications of a subsample of transients. The
HLTDS will also include a pilot component early in the mission to provide templates for difference
imaging and data for calibrating methodology and measuring supernova rates. The HLTDS is
designed to probe the origin of cosmic acceleration by using SN Ia to make precision measurements

–6–
of the cosmic expansion history. It will also enable a wide range of extragalactic time-domain and
transient science investigations and provide deep co-added imaging and spectroscopy over areas
1–2 orders of magnitude larger than any comparably deep Hubble imaging.
The High-Latitude Wide Area Survey (HLWAS) will observe a 2400 deg2 medium tier in YJH
(F106, F129, F158) imaging and grism spectroscopy, with characteristic imaging depth of 26.5
mag (AB, 5σ point source, texp ≈ 600 sec) and spectroscopic depth of of 1.5 × 10−16 erg/cm2 /sec
(5σ line flux limit, texp ≈ 1500 sec). A wide tier will cover an additional 2700 deg2 in H-band
(F158) imaging only, with the same exposure time. A deep tier of 19.2 deg2 with longer cumulative exposure time will reach about 1.2 mag deeper in imaging and a factor of 2.5 deeper in line
flux, and it will include Z (F087), F (F184), K (F213), and wide W (F146) filters as well as YJH. A
5 deg2 subset of this tier will have additional YJH imaging to reach 0.5 mag further depth in these
three bands. The HLWAS imaging survey is designed to probe the origin of cosmic acceleration
by using weak gravitational lensing and galaxy clustering to make precision measurements of cosmic expansion and the growth of cosmic structure. The HLWAS spectroscopic survey is designed
to achieve similar goals using precision measurements of baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) and
redshift-space distortions in galaxy clustering. These data will also enable a wide range of science
investigations including solar system objects, Galactic structure, nearby galaxies, and galaxy and
quasar evolution out to the epoch of reionization. The deep tier provides necessary calibration data
for the medium and wide tiers, and it will be a powerful resource for studying faint stellar populations and the most distant galaxies and quasars. HLWAS observations will be spread throughout
the 5-year mission, with at least half of the deep tier observations carried out early in the mission
and most of the wide tier observations carried out late in the mission.
While the Core Community Surveys will already support science goals far beyond those used to set
their technical requirements, the General Astrophysics Surveys program will enable investigations
tailored to specific science goals. With up to 30 programs allowed in the 389 day allocation, the
mean observing time for a General Astrophysics Survey is about 13 days, or 1.1 Msec. Based
on the recommendations of Roman’s Early Science Definition Committee, a General Astrophysics
Survey of the Galactic plane is being defined now. While details are still to be determined, this
one-month survey will likely image several hundred deg2 of the Galactic plane in one or two filters
and survey a much larger area of the Galactic bulge than the GBTDS (Figure 1). The Galactic plane
survey is planned to be executed during the first two years of the mission, nominally during the
first season when the GBTDS is not observing at high cadence (Figure 2). While some other GAS
time will also be allocated during the first two years, most of the GAS observing will occur later
in the mission, when the completion of some programs makes scheduling more flexible, and when
investigations using the early Roman data have given the community more complete knowledge
of the observatory’s capabilities. GAS programs will be selected through a combination of open,
competitive proposals and community-defined processes.

–7–
All Roman data, from both Core Community Surveys and GAS programs, will be made public
through the Science Operations Center (SOC) at STScI as soon as the basic data reduction is
complete. There is no proprietary period on Roman data.
The ROTAC recommendations cover the 5-year prime mission of the Roman Space Telescope.
The observatory is designed to accommodate a much longer lifetime, so we anticipate that even
the ambitious program described here represents just the first phase of Roman’s long-term scientific
contributions, discoveries, and impact.

3.

Implementation of the Core Community Surveys
3.1.

High Latitude Wide Area Survey (HLWAS)

The goals of the HLWAS are to probe the growth of cosmic structure and expansion of the Universe via galaxy clustering and gravitational lensing, while also enabling a wide range of general
astrophysics via a deep, wide-field infrared survey. Key design considerations included the balance of imaging at different depths and spectroscopy for this wide-area high-impact survey, the
field placement with respect to existing complementary data (including Euclid), and the detailed
selection of filters.
The ROTAC recommends adoption of the nominal (in-guide) survey proposed by the HLWAS DC.
The core of the survey is a “medium tier” of YJH imaging and grism spectroscopy over 2415 deg2 .
A “deep tier” of 19.2 deg2 provides essential calibration data and will also be a powerful survey
of faint objects. A “wide tier” expands the HLWAS imaging area by an additional 2700 deg2 in
H-band only.
These three tiers enable precise cosmological measurements that meet the mission requirements.
Imaging in the wide and medium tiers will be utilized for weak lensing measurements of the growth
of structure, with multi-band observations in the medium tier providing excellent control of systematics. The grism spectroscopy in the medium tier will enable geometric measurements of cosmic
expansion via BAO and large-scale structure constraints via redshift space distortions. The deep
tier (including ultra-deep imaging) will provide critical calibration of the cosmological analyses
including shape measurements, photometric redshifts, and spectroscopic decontamination.
Each of the three tiers also offers distinct value in meeting the broader mission requirement of
deep, wide general astrophysics surveys.
Medium Tier: The medium tier, which comprises YJH imaging and grism spectroscopy over
2415 deg2 , has a characteristic depth of 26.5 mag (AB) in imaging (5σ point source) and

–8–
1.5×10−16 erg/cm2 /sec in spectroscopy (5σ emission line integrated flux limit). It is expected
to yield about 360 million galaxy shape measurements for weak lensing (with neff ≈ 41
arcmin−2 ) and 19 million spectroscopic galaxy redshifts.
The multi-band, Hubble-resolution imaging and deep spectroscopy will also enable the study
of local galaxies, Milky Way stellar populations, and the relation between galaxies and dark
matter over a vast span of redshift.
Deep Tier: The deep tier covers two of Rubin’s near-equatorial deep drilling fields, COSMOS and
XMM-LSS, in ZYJHFK, the wide W band, and in grism spectroscopy. In YJH, the imaging
will be approximately 1.2 mag deeper than in the medium tier, and the same exposure times
will be used for the other filters, with 5σ point source depth ranging from 25.9 AB mag (K,
F213) to 28.3 AB mag (W, F146). The total spectroscopic exposures will be 8× longer than
those in the medium tier, with a line flux limit about 2.5× deeper. The deep tier also includes
an ultra-deep component, imaging 5 deg2 in YJH to a depth 1.7 mag fainter than the medium
tier, for calibrating noise biases in weak lensing shape measurements.
The deep tier will also enable studies of faint objects including the most distant galaxies,
with depth ∼0.5 mag deeper at near-IR wavelengths than the HST CANDELS program, in
more bands, over an area 86× larger. The ultra-deep component will probe another 0.5 mag
deeper over 1/4 of this area. The deep tier spectroscopy will probe the physical properties
of distant and faint galaxies, reaching a similar flux limit to 3D-HST over an area 100 times
larger. The deep tier also includes dense time sampling that will make it valuable for solar
system science and some time-domain applications.
Wide Tier: The wide tier uses 80 days (15% of the total HLWAS allocation) to more than double
the total survey area, albeit in a single band (H, F158). The exposure time matches that of
the medium tier, but the characteristic depth is slightly shallower (26.2 mag AB) because of
a higher zodiacal background in the available fields. The wide tier is expected to yield an
additional 260 million shape measurements (neff ≈ 27 arcmin−2 ).

The wide and medium tiers together yield over 5000 deg2 of high-latitude sky with Hubblelike near-IR imaging, all of which should also have optical photometry from Rubin. The
gains from the wide tier are still larger when considering overlap with other wide-field multiwavelength surveys. For example, the wide tier greatly expands the overlap with the DESI
spectroscopic galaxy survey.

For the underguide and overguide scenarios (detailed descriptions in the DC report; Appendix C.1),
the HLWAS DC maintained the structure of the medium and deep tiers and focused on varying the
area covered by the wide (H-band imaging only) tier. The consensus of the ROTAC was that the
underguide scenario, which entailed reductions to the HLWAS wide tier in both the north and south

–9–
Galactic cap regions, would require too much loss of science that is distinctively achievable with
Roman. Conversely, the ROTAC felt that the overguide scenario, which focused on expanding
the wide tier area in the South Celestial Pole (in part to maximize overlap with the South Pole
Telescope), did not offer sufficiently broad impact to require inclusion in the CCS design.
One topic of discussion for the ROTAC when considering the HLWAS was the unique capabilities
of Roman for the wide tier compared to the ongoing wide-area survey being carried out by the
ESA Euclid mission. Euclid’s NIR filters provide lower sensitivity and resolution than Roman
at those wavelengths, so the most relevant comparison is between the HLWAS wide tier and the
Euclid visible (VIS) survey. The discussion highlighted a number of key distinctions: Roman
data are immediately available to all (and the US community in particular), unlike Euclid data; the
HLWAS wide tier imaging utilizes a standard NIR band (H) versus Euclid’s wide, non-standard
optical VIS band that is also more vulnerable to chromatic PSF effects that may bias weak lensing
measurements; and Roman’s H-band has moderately higher angular resolution (≈0.1′′ ) than Euclid
VIS (0.16′′ ). In addition, the HLWAS wide tier fills out the equatorial band that will have Rubin
LSST coverage and is accessible from the Northern Hemisphere, including DESI, while Euclid’s
primary survey (while observing much more of the sky overall) covers only ∼470 deg2 of the 2700
deg2 HLWAS wide tier. These distinct capabilities justified adopting the full in-guide area of the
HLWAS wide tier.
In concurrence with the HLWAS DC, the ROTAC recommends scheduling at least half of the deep
tier observations early in the mission, both for calibration and for galaxy and quasar evolution
science. The wide tier, on the other hand, is better scheduled for the later phases of the mission.

3.2.

High Latitude Time Domain Survey (HLTDS)

The primary goal of the HLTDS is to discover and follow up SNe Ia to measure the expansion
history of the Universe. The HLTDS will also potentially discover exotic high-redshift transients,
dust-extinguished sources, and cool/red objects. Furthermore, the NIR transient sky has been less
well explored to date, offering the opportunity for serendipitous discovery.
The primary survey design considerations included filter combination, depth and cadence, value
of spectroscopy, field selection, and survey extensions. The HLTDS Committee recommended a
survey that takes advantage of Roman’s unique capabilities to target SN Ia at redshifts not easily
accessible from the ground. Simulations showed that at least two tiers are required to cover a broad
redshift range from z = 0.5 − 2.5, with observations in four or five filters to measure accurate colors
in the rest-frame optical and NIR. Exposure times and cadences were chosen to accumulate a fixed
(on average) S/N at the target redshifts.

– 10 –
The HLTDS DC restricted the survey fields to lie in the continuous viewing zones (CVZ) for
continuous visibility through the year. Multiple fields are desirable for spectroscopic follow-up
observations on multiple ground-based telescopes and to also reduce cosmic variance.
Due to constraints on the telescope’s roll angles, the mosaic pattern of the fields must be roughly
circular to reduce the amount of edge effects as the fields are observed through the year. This is
crucial for reducing areas with poor cadence especially for mosaics with small number of pointings.
Thus, the feasible areas are quantized.

Figure 3. Top: nominal timeline of HLTDS components. Bottom: Relative area covered by the
different imaging and spectroscopy tiers. Graphic from the HLTDS DC report (Appendix C.2).
The nominal/in-guide plan, which is the one recommended by the ROTAC, comprises the following
three components:
Core Component: The heart of the HLTDS will take place over a 2-year duration approximately
in the middle of Roman’s 5-year mission. It consists of two fields — coincident with the
ELAIS-N1 field in the North (α, δ = 242.504, +54.510 deg) and the Euclid Deep Field South
(EDFS) in the South (α, δ = 61.241, −48.423 deg) — layered with tiers of both imaging and
spectroscopy. The Wide Imaging Tier will cover 10.68 deg2 in the North and 7.59 deg2 in the
South with RZYJH filters, with a ∼10-day cadence of alternating filters (i.e., one sequence

– 11 –
of RZY or RJH every ∼5 days), to reach an average maximum-light S/N of 20 for SN Ia at
z ∼ 0.9. The Deep Imaging Tier will cover 1.97 deg2 in the North and 4.5 deg2 in the South
with ZYJHF filters, with a similarly interlaced sequence of ZYJ and ZHF images, to reach
an average maximum-light S/N of 20 for SN Ia at z ∼ 1.7. The expected number of “good”
SNe Ia, defined to have a cumulative S/N > 40, is ∼ 7500 and ∼ 6800 in the Wide and Deep
Tiers, respectively.
The Wide and Deep Spectroscopy Tiers, covering 4.5 deg2 and 0.56 deg2 , respectively, will
both take place in the deep imaging area in the South, with a ∼5 day cadence. The exposure times in the Wide and Deep Tiers are 900 sec and 3600 sec, respectively, providing
redshifts and classification of a subsample of transients in that field. The total allocation of
this component is 158 days.
Pilot Component: This component will take place before the Core Component and as early as
possible in the mission. It serves multiple purposes – 1) collection of template images for difference imaging, 2) collection of reference prism data for host galaxy subtraction/modeling
and 3) measurement of the rate of SNe Ia above z ∼ 1. A series of 8 observations will be
made on a cadence of 20 days, thus enabling light curve measurements and data acquisition
over multiple roll angles. The total allocation of this component is 15 days.
Extended Component: This component extends the temporal coverage of the Deep Imaging Tier
over Roman’s entire 5-year mission. A total of 8 observations will be made in between
the Pilot and Core Components as well as after the Core Component with an approximate
cadence of 120 days. This will enable discoveries of the highest-redshift super-luminous and
pair-instability SNe possibly out to z ∼ 5. The total allocation of this component is 7 days.
Detailed descriptions of overguide and underguide survey designs are given in the DC report (Appendix C.2). The underguide design option, which takes 20 days less than the in-guide, would
reduce the area of the Wide Imaging Tier by nearly 20% — from 18 deg2 to 14.5 deg2 — without any other adjustments. This would result in about 1500 fewer SN Ia. The ROTAC does not
recommend this option.
The overguide design, which extends 20 days longer than the recommended nominal design, consisted of additional imaging observations in the Deep Tier in the K and R filters to complete the
full filter set. This would enhance galaxy science and improve photometric redshift measurements.
The ROTAC does not recommend this option, as the enhancement to the core goals of the program
are incremental.

– 12 –
3.3.

Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS)

The primary science driver for the GBTDS is the demographics of small, long-period exoplanets.
This science will be enabled by obtaining high cadence (<15 minute), high precision time series
photometry over a ∼2-square degree field of view towards the Galactic bulge, in order to observe
microlensing events caused by both bound and free-floating planets.
As with the other two CCS above, the field placement and filter selection were important design
considerations, but the GBTDS involved a particularly complex consideration of tradeoffs between
survey area and imaging cadence. Each design option included a region of 5–7 contiguous fields at
(ℓ ≈ −0.5◦ , b ≈ −1.2◦ ), which was selected to optimize stellar density against the impacts of dust
extinction. They also all included a field on the Galactic center, which was a field of particular
interest to the general astrophysics community and was recommended by many white papers.

Figure 4. Field layout for the overguide GBTDS survey as recommended by the ROTAC. Background contours show the expected yield for 1 MEarth free-floating planets. Graphic from the
GBTDS DC report (Appendix C.3).
The ROTAC recommends adoption of the overguide survey outlined by the GBTDS DC, with some
modifications as detailed below. Figure 4 shows the current field layout of this design. This survey
comprises four main components:
High-Cadence Seasons: Observations of the survey fields in six of the 10 available bulge seasons,
with a cadence of 12.1 minutes with the wide W (F146) filter and a cadence of 12 hours or

– 13 –
faster with the Z (F087) and K (F213), or other recommended filters to achieve the science
requirements of the exoplanet microlensing survey. These seasons should be scheduled as
the first three and the last three bulge seasons over the 5-year duration of the Roman mission
in order to maximize the astrometric baseline, and observations are recommended to span
the full duration of each bulge season to maximize the photometric baselines.
Low-Cadence Seasons: Observations of the same high-cadence survey fields over the four remaining bulge seasons with a cadence of three days with the W (F146) filter and the K
(F213) filter (but see below) to enable the recovery of long-duration microlensing events and
the detection of multiple types of variables. It is recommended to take four exposures per
visit, for stacking to improve photometric and astrometric precision and cosmic-ray rejection, and to optimize the science time-to-slew time ratio. Field locations are recommended to
be identical to the high-cadence seasons in order to preserve the target sample, photometric
and astrometric baselines.
Multiband Photometry Snapshots: Observations of the survey fields with the five filters that
are not used in the high-cadence or low-cadence seasons for stellar characterization. These
observations will take place at the start, middle, and end of each of the ten bulge seasons, for
a total of 30 snapshots over the survey.
Spectroscopic Snapshots: Observations of the survey fields with the grism to enable measurements of stellar temperatures, metallicities and radial velocities. As with the multiband
photometry, these observations will take place at the start, middle, and end of each of the ten
bulge seasons, for a total of 30 epochs.
Detailed descriptions of the nominal, overguide, and underguide survey designs are given in the
DC report (Appendix C.3). In short, the underguide design included shorter total observing time
per bulge season, longer cadences in both the high- and low-cadence seasons, much longer cadence
in the Galactic Center field, and fewer snapshots, but in a larger number of fields (in order to meet
mission requirements with the complex interplay between survey area and duration). The ROTAC
does not recommend this option.
As this CCS is the only one for which ROTAC is recommending the larger overguide time allocation over the nominal allocation, we describe our decision-making process here in greater detail
than in the subsections above.
The nominal design is, unsurprisingly, intermediate between the underguide and overguide designs in terms of per-season observing allocation, number of fields, cadence, and number of
multiband+grism snapshots. The ROTAC solicited further simulations from the GBTDS DC for
some of the ancillary science cases (such as transiting exoplanets and asteroseismology) using the

– 14 –
current field layouts and survey parameters, since such simulations were not available in time for
the DC report. As a result, in addition to the underguide, nominal, and overguide designs, the
ROTAC considered a survey with the nominal time allotment (420 days), but with 5 contiguous
fields and a 12.1 min cadence.
In deciding between the survey designs, the ROTAC was persuaded as to the value of higher cadence observations (12.1 min rather than 14.8 min), even at the price of a smaller survey area.
Higher cadence observations are expected to yield better sensitivity to small transiting planets,
which are a particular strength of Roman at a large range of Galactic distances, though the decreased number of fields leads to fewer detected transits by large planets (left panel of Figure 5).
While a higher-cadence/fewer-fields survey design leads to fewer asteroseismic detections (a ∼7%
decrease in the overguide compared to the nominal), the resulting detections will have higher S/N
and thus enable more precise measurements (right panel of Figure 5), which both the GBTDS DC
and ROTAC deemed more compelling than high numbers of noisy detections.

Figure 5. Yield simulations for transiting planets and asteroseismology using the recommended
survey designs. Left: Transiting exoplanet yield relative to the nominal survey as a function of
planet radius (x-axis) and host star spectral types (y-axis). Blue bars denote the underguide, and
orange bars the overguide survey. Numbers in each panel denote the number of planets expected to
be detected in the nominal survey design. Figure credit Robby Wilson (GSFC). Right: Signal-tonoise ratio histogram for asteroseismic detections in red clump stars for the nominal and overguide
recommendations. Figure credit: Trevor Weiss (CSULB) and Noah Downing (OSU).
While microlensing yields are indeed smaller in a higher-cadence/fewer-fields survey design (see
Tables 5 and 6 of the GBTDS DC report; Appendix C.3), the expected decrement is very mod-

– 15 –
est and did not significantly concern the ROTAC. A higher-cadence survey is expected to detect
∼5% more ≲MMars free-floating planets, and ∼10% fewer planets with ≳10 M⊕ , compared to the
nominal design; ROTAC decided that it was compelling to prioritize the lower mass planets. The
higher-cadence survey will also yield ∼15% more finite source measurements, which will translate to more mass measurements for planet microlensing events. While these simulations (some
of which were made after the DC report, at the request of the ROTAC) highlight that there are
challenging trade-offs between the 14.8 min/6-contiguous-fields nominal design and a 12.1 min/5contiguous-fields scenario, the ROTAC ultimately felt that 14.8 min cadence skirted the edge of
what is necessary for important GBTDS science drivers, and furthermore that a 12.1 min cadence
leaves a more comfortable margin for extracting low-mass planets (see also § 6.4 below), highquality asteroseismic signals, and serendipitous events from the data. The ROTAC was concerned
that critical information could be lost and made unrecoverable, should the lower cadence design
be implemented. The committee therefore converged on a recommendation for 5 contiguous fields
plus a Galactic center field at a 12.1 min cadence.
In deciding between the nominal and overguide time allotments, the ROTAC explicitly considered
each of the following components: the additional 12 days that would be allotted to monitoring
during the high-cadence seasons, the additional 3 days that would be allotted to monitoring during
the low-cadence seasons, the additional 3 days that would be spent on multi-band photometric
snapshots, and the additional 2 days that would go to grism snapshots. The ROTAC was compelled
by the fact that the overguide design prioritizes broader astrophysics questions (e.g., black hole
microlensing, Sgr A*, and binary stars) at the price of slightly diminished yields for the core
science of planet microlensing. However, the overguide will still comfortably meet the Level 1
science requirements, under the assumption of the Cassan et al. (2012) mass function (but see
§ 6.4 below).
The ROTAC was convinced of the value of spending as much time on the GBTDS fields as possible during the high-cadence seasons, and generally supported the increase of 2 days per season
suggested by the overguide design. The longer seasons will partially compensate for the smaller
survey area necessitated by the faster 12.1-min cadence and also for the lower microlensing planet
yields of the updated Suzuki et al. (2016) mass function. However, during the first Galactic bulge
season, there is a need for wider field observations as part of the Early-Definition Galactic Plane
Survey2 , to enable proper motion measurements of stars in the that survey’s footprint. Therefore,
the ROTAC recommends that GBTDS be allotted 70.5 days in the high-cadence bulge seasons,
but that the first bulge season should be reduced by an amount that will enable the Galactic Plane
Survey to conduct its first epoch of observations (anticipated to be ∼2 days).
2

https://roman.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/galactic_plane_survey_definition.html

– 16 –
The ROTAC was persuaded of the value of additional monitoring observations in the low-cadence
seasons, as moving from a 5 day to a 3 day cadence is demonstrated to increase the number of
black hole microlensing mass measurements at fixed precision by ≈ 10% (Figure 9 of the GBTDS
DC report; Appendix C.3). However, the committee considered how scheduling these 3-daycadence observations would interweave with the 5-day cadence of the HLTDS (which requires
large slews between the north and south). The ROTAC was concerned that the observing cadence
of the two surveys could beat against one another in inefficient ways, potentially leading to large
overheads and limiting flexibility of Galactic bulge or other GAS science. It is likely that similar
scientific benefits of the GBTDS low-cadence season observations could be reached either with
longer duration visits on the nominal 5 day cadence or with flexible, aperiodic cadence that seeks
to approximate a ∼3 day cadence, while maintaining efficient observatory operations. Therefore,
the ROTAC’s recommendation for this component of GBTDS is to increase the time allotted to
the low-cadence season monitoring by 3 days above nominal, but for the Roman project to work
closely with the relevant scientific and technical experts to best schedule this additional time.
The ROTAC was also persuaded of the broad scientific value of the additional photometric and
grism snapshots, which significantly improve the window function for time series analyses. The
confusion-limited sensitivity of K ≲ 16 mag will yield grism spectra for hundreds of thousands
of stars and ∼10 km s−1 radial velocity precision, while photometric timeseries with all of the
Roman bands will provide additional insights into a range of science questions related to stellar
variability. The ROTAC therefore recommends the GBTDS be allocated the additional 2 days for
these observations.
Thus, the ROTAC generally endorses the overguide survey design for GBTDS, with two important
caveats: that the first high-cadence bulge season be modestly reduced to leave time for the Galactic
Plane Survey, and that the observation schedule during the low-cadence seasons be further studied
to minimize disruption to the HLTDS and GAS.

4.

General Astrophysics Surveys

The ROTAC placed a high priority on enabling the community to propose general astrophysics
surveys (GAS) that will address compelling science goals beyond those that can be accomplished
by the CCS, and we adopted a stewardship role towards the valuable GAS observing time. As with
the CCS, the GA programs will be limited to the wide-field instrument.
The prime mission profile recommended by the ROTAC allocates 389 days for GAS, after accounting for the recommended allowances for the HLWAS, HTLDS, and GBTDS programs. This GAS
allocation is well above the minimum requirement that ≥15% of Roman’s prime mission science

– 17 –
time be reserved for such work; indeed it slightly exceeds the mission goal of making 25% of the
time available.
This time is currently planned to be allocated to a maximum of 30 approved WFI GA surveys that
will be solicited across a subset of Roman calls for proposals (alongside proposals for analysis
resources only). This subset is expected to span 2026–2029, with most of the GAS time being
allocated in the later cycles when the observatory performance is more fully understood. The
ROTAC advocates that the community organize to generate proposals for relatively large surveys,
designing each to address broad science cases, to take better advantage of Roman’s capabilities
than many different small programs would. As an example, one such GAS program has already
been approved by the Early-Definition Astrophysics Survey Assessment Committee: a survey of
the Galactic Plane3 that will take 30 days of the GAS observing time. Moreover, numerous science
cases recommended to the CCS DCs through white papers were judged to be better suited for
GAS proposals that would be complementary to the CCS rather than included directly in the CCS
design. The ROTAC encourages the community to continue to pursue GAS programs that benefit
from the CCS data, but may require additional observations.
Conserving the valuable resource of the GA time was a high priority of the ROTAC, which considered the impact of the CCS allocations on the amount of time available for these programs. When
assessing the CCS designs, the ROTAC took into account which potential science cases outside of
the survey requirements could be addressed with a separate GAS program optimized by the community. In general, the underguide options for the CCS options were felt to be sufficient to meet
the Roman science requirements for these individual surveys, but would not produce datasets with
the most expansive scientific value for the community, while the nominal designs would produce
data applicable to several of the additional science cases provided to the committees via white papers (e.g., Appendix A of the GBTDS report in Appendix C.3). Naturally, the overguide options
were able to address not only more of the core science but also additional ancillary science with
the additional time allocation.
As described in § 3, the ROTAC felt that the nominal designs for the HLWAS and HLTDS nicely
balanced the amount of time above the underguide with the benefits of the additional data to the
community; these additional data could be achieved most easily through providing those surveys
with the nominal time allocation, since any separate program would be a significantly less efficient
way to achieve that critical science. However, the GBTDS overguide option adds significantly
more community value to the survey, as determined through the submitted white papers, even at
slight expense to the total planet yield (§ 3.3). Thus, the ROTAC is recommending the GBTDS
overguide allocation. This recommendation still enables the mission to meet its goal of GAS time
3

https://roman.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/galactic_plane_survey_definition.html

– 18 –
allocation while providing a large amount of additional time-domain data, with a wealth of GA
science capabilities, to the community.
In addition to total time allocation, the scheduling considerations of the CCS and their impact
on the GAS were also taken into account. The ROTAC considered the value of having GAS
observations early in the mission (e.g., in the first year), which is also in heavy demand by the
CCS. The ROTAC recommends preserving some room for GAS programs that require long time
baselines (e.g., proper motion studies) in the schedule; however, it is clear and justified that the
CCS all need to obtain early observations to verify that their long-term strategies, which stretch
across the mission, will be viable. The ROTAC was provided with some preliminary mission
schedules (e.g., Figure 2) to confirm that GAS time will be available interspersed across the full
5-year mission given our recommendations for the CCS.

5.
5.1.

Process & Timeline
Committee Empanelment

In July 2024, the Roman Space Telescope team sent out a call4 for self-nominations of individuals
willing to serve on the Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee (ROTAC). Over fifty nominations from around the world were received, and in December 2024 the committee membership
was announced. The committee is composed of thirteen scientists: ten community representatives
with expertise covering a broad range of astrophysics, and one co-chair from each of the three
Core Community Survey Definition Committees. The ROTAC is co-chaired by Dr. Gail Zasowski
(The University of Utah) and Dr. Saurabh W. Jha (Rutgers University). The rest of the committee
includes:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
4

Laura Chomiuk, Michigan State University
Xiaohui Fan, University of Arizona
Ryan Hickox, Dartmouth College
Dan Huber, University of Hawai‘i
Eamonn Kerins, University of Manchester
Chip Kobulnicky, University of Wyoming
Tod Lauer, NOIRLab
Masao Sako, University of Pennsylvania
Alice Shapley, University of California, Los Angeles

https://roman.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/roman_time_allocation_committee.html

– 19 –
• Denise Stephens, Brigham Young University
• David Weinberg, The Ohio State University
• Ben Williams, University of Washington
The ROTAC was charged with reviewing the implementation reports of the three core communitydefined surveys and advising the Roman Project on the implementation of each survey. The ROTAC was also charged with considering the balance between these CCS and the future PI-led suite
of General Astrophysics Surveys (GAS). To accomplish these tasks, the ROTAC was instructed to:
• Become familiar with the Roman science requirements, including the Roman Mission objectives in cosmology and exoplanet demographics that were to be met with the CCS portfolio.
• Review the input from the CCS DCs and discuss the recommended implementation options,
with the DC representatives as needed to fully understand the recommendations.
• Represent the interests of the scientists who will make use of Roman through both the CCS
and the GAS, when considering the legacy value of the recommended CCS implementation
options and potential impacts of the CCS time allocation on the PI-led GAS.
• Work with the Roman Project at NASA/GSFC and the Roman Science Centers to understand
any scheduling conflicts or other operational impacts among the recommended CCS designs.
If necessary, the ROTAC was to provide advice to the Roman Project at NASA/GSFC on
adjudicating any conflicts among the CCS.
• Present the ROTAC recommendations to the Roman Project in a written form suitable for
release to the scientific community.

5.2.

Meeting Cadence and Format

The ROTAC met twice in December 2024 for orientation and planning purposes, and then convened each week from late January through early April 2025. The committee met through Zoom,
and the day and time of the meeting was alternated every other week to allow all members of the
ROTAC to be able to attend synchronously at least once every two weeks. Meeting minutes and
recordings were made available to the full committee to review.
The ROTAC chairs guided discussions of how science return would scale in the underguide, nominal, and overguide time allocation scenarios, and of practical considerations to increase the total
science return and efficiency of the unified WFI (CCS+GAS) program. Ongoing real-time input
from representatives of the Core Community Surveys greatly facilitated these discussions. The
ROTAC progress was guided in part by a series of asynchronous polls on the science cases and implementation options that highlighted where the committee shared general agreement and where

– 20 –
focused discussion would be useful. In general, these ROTAC poll responses showed a broad
consensus that shaped the ultimate recommendations for the allocations for each survey.

5.3.

Hybrid Meeting and Finalization of Recommendations

A hybrid ROTAC meeting was held March 20–21, 2025, at the Space Telescope Science Institute
in Baltimore, MD, with roughly 75% attending in person and the remainder online. The session
started with a high level overview of the Roman Project and a reminder of the ROTAC’s charge
to recommend an optimal balance between the CCS and the GAS, which together are allocated
1527 days of Roman observing time. Over the course of the two days, the ROTAC received presentations and updates from various technical teams, in particular from the SOC on progress to
test the scheduling of various CCS combinations into the APT software, which had been requested
earlier by the ROTAC. The SOC also shared a visualizations of the multiyear scheduling plan
(e.g., Figure 2), to highlight relevant conflicts and scheduling issues. This plan did not reveal any
significant pinch points that required resolution by the ROTAC.
After a significant amount of time spent discussing scheduling considerations for the GBTDS, the
ROTAC requested and received a status report from the Galactic Plane Survey definition committee. At that point, the committee felt it had reached consensus on its recommendations.

6.

Considerations for the Recommendations

The ROTAC’s recommendations are based on a wide array of information supplied by the reports of
the DCs and by the the Roman Project Office and Survey Operations team. These include the array
of science objectives across the core surveys, trade-offs in those objectives for differing survey
designs, and the potential for scheduling conflicts between the surveys. Roman’s capabilities offer
ample opportunity for ground-breaking surveys across many areas of astrophysics. The ROTAC
recommendations favor CCS designs that offer maximal potential for additional astrophysics. The
ROTAC has also been keen to safeguard observing windows that will encourage ambitious GAS
proposals. Given all of these factors, inevitably there remain some items that cannot be optimized
at this stage; we describe below those that arose during our discussions with the highest potential
impact.

– 21 –
6.1.

Ongoing Survey Optimizations

The ROTAC recommendations are designed with three objectives. Firstly, they include provision
for specific elements within each of the CCS that we regard as scientifically excellent and that
exploit Roman’s powerful survey capability. Secondly, they set out recommended overall time
allocations for each of the CCS. Thirdly, they establish the overall time envelope for CCS activity
and therefore the time available for GAS programs.
The ROTAC recommendations recognize the high scientific value of different elements comprising
each of the CCS. These include the pilot, extended and core components specified in the nominal
HLTDS design, the medium, wide and deep tiers of the nominal HLWAS, and the high cadence
Galactic Center and microlensing fields of the overguide GBTDS. The ROTAC recommends that
all of these CCS elements should be present within the final survey designs. However, within the
bounds of the overall recommended time allocations, we leave the final choices of filter strategy
and precise field placement as matters for the Roman mission in consultation with the respective
experts (e.g., the Project Infrastructure Teams and DCs).
The Science Operations Center presented to the ROTAC some early modeling of the Roman observation schedule that included nominal HLWAS, nominal HLTDS, overguide GBTDS, and GPS
components (e.g., Figure 2). Provisional analysis indicates that these options can all be accommodated with significant flexibility for a range of GAS program designs. The ROTAC is satisfied that
the provisional scheduling of the CCS and the GPS leave sufficient observing windows of varying
duration to facilitate high-impact Roman GAS programs. We acknowledge and stress, however,
that modeling the Roman observing schedule remains an ongoing and iterative process.

6.2.

External Data Requirements

All three core surveys will benefit from additional data from other projects. The GBTDS does
not have any formal requirement for ancillary data but will benefit from early observations made
by Hubble and Euclid. Additional simultaneous observations from Rubin, PRIME, and Subaru,
as well as from the OGLE, MOA, and KMTNet microlensing surveys, will also help extend and
improve the GBTDS science potential.
To secure its scientific objectives, the HLWAS will require optical photometry from Rubin, as well
as ground-based calibration spectroscopy within the deep fields. The overall footprint design also
includes overlap with other large-area surveys.
The HLTDS will prioritize Roman’s unique capabilities to precisely measure higher redshift SNe,

– 22 –
but the full cosmological measurement will require a high-quality sample of Type Ia SNe across
the full redshift range from z = 0 to z ≈ 2. For the intermediate redshifts (z ∼ 0.5), SNe Ia from the
Rubin LSST Deep Drilling Fields will be crucial to satisfy the HLTDS cosmology requirements,
while surveys targeting SNe Ia in the low-redshift Hubble flow will also play a key role.
In its considerations, the ROTAC assumed that all ancillary data necessary to fulfill Roman CCS
science requirements will be available to the entire science community, just as Roman data itself
will be. The ROTAC did not take into account the availability of data that may improve Roman
science, but which is not critical to satisfy core requirements.

6.3.

Retaining Flexibility for General Astrophysics

While the core science objectives for Roman are well defined, and the designs for the CCS are
relatively mature, we do not yet know about GAS programs that Roman will undertake, with the
exception of the GPS. This uncertainty argues for maintaining flexibility in CCS scheduling. One
example of this is the low-cadence seasons of the GBTDS. The original overguide design recommended by the GBTDS DC proposed a three-day observing cadence during those bulge seasons
not scheduled for the high-cadence GBTDS observations. This low-cadence scheduling will be
important for long-timescale light-curve characterization, but it may also make it very difficult
to accommodate other GAS programs, especially any focusing on the bulge region. It may also
cause significant slew overheads resulting from clashing GBTDS and HLTDS cadences, indirectly
impacting the GAS. These negative outcomes should be avoided, for example by adjusting the
observing strategy of the low-cadence GBTDS (§ 3.3 above).
As also described above, we recommend that two days during the middle of the first GBTDS highcadence bulge season be used in GPS observations (part of the GAS) for the wider Galactic bulge
region. These initial observations will establish an essential early baseline for subsequent GPS
passes to enable the highest-quality Galactic bulge astrometric studies.

6.4.

Recommendations amid Change and Uncertainty

The ROTAC emphasizes that our recommendations made at this point in time are — as they must
be — based on a current snapshot of an evolving scientific landscape. Mission scheduling and
survey optimization remain active and ongoing activities that may require further tuning of the
allocations put forward in our report.

– 23 –
Additionally, the CCS represent ambitious, multi-year commitments. We expect that during the
remaining preparatory and survey execution phases, new science results may emerge from Roman,
or from other surveys, that argue for adaptation in CCS strategy for Roman to capitalize best on new
knowledge. The ROTAC also envisages that mid-mission reviews of the performance of the surveys
may also prompt revisions of survey priorities and strategy and notes there is an expectation that
GAS observations would play a larger role in a potential Roman extended mission. The ROTAC is
keen to ensure that its recommendations leave scope for survey modifications that are responsive
to an evolving mission and scientific landscape.
An example comes from the design of the GBTDS survey. The original design assumed a fiducial
planet mass function with an increasing number of low mass planets per host until saturation at
2 planets per dex2 in logarithmic mass and host separation (Section 3.2.2 of the GBTDS DC report;
Appendix C.3). However, updated microlensing measurements indicate that the saturation level for
the lowest mass planets may be at, or below, 0.5 planets per star per dex2 . The GBTDS science
requirement for the number of low mass planet detections to be made by Roman was motivated by
the assumed fiducial mass function; it is not reachable in practice if the updated mass function limit
accurately describes the Universe. Guided by the Roman mission office, the ROTAC interpreted
the GBTDS science requirement as representing the design goal for Roman if the earlier fiducial
mass function represents reality. We are satisfied that our recommended design option comfortably
satisfies that goal.
The fact that Roman CCS design requirements deployed metrics within regions of ill-defined discovery space that have subsequently needed revision was not seen as a flaw or a concern by the
ROTAC. Rather, it serves to highlight that Roman is a mission that is designed to explore regions
of discovery space that are highly uncertain. It underscores just why we need Roman, and why
Roman will be a revolutionary facility for exoplanetary science, cosmology, and astrophysics
at all the scales in between.

– 24 –
A.

Global Contributions to the Roman WFI Observing Plan

These maps highlight the institutions of scientists who contributed to Roman white papers or science pitches, and those who served on the Project Infrastructure Teams (PITs), CCS and GPS DCs,
and the ROTAC. The wide distribution across six continents demonstrates the global enthusiasm
for this mission.

Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js

Figure 6. Institutions of individuals who contributed to white papers and science pitches, and who
served on the PITs, the DCs, and the ROTAC. Figure credit: Gail Zasowski; additional data provided by Leslie Beauchamp, Jenna Ballard, and Julie McEnery.

– 25 –
B.

Works Cited in This Report and the CCS DC Reports

We include here all references from the DC reports in Appendix C.
Abbott, R., et al. 2021, arXiv:2111.03634 [astro-ph.HE]
Agol, E., & Kamionkowski, M. 2002, MNRAS, 334, 553
Akeson, R., Armus, L., Bachelet, E., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1902.05569
Akeson, R. L., Chen, X., Ciardi, D., et al. 2013, PASP, 125, 989
Albrecht, A., et al. 2006, arXiv e-prints (astro-ph/0609591)
Alonso-García, J., Minniti, D., Catelan, M., et al. 2017, ApJ, 849, L13
Amaro-Seoane, P., Andrews, J., Arca Sedda, M., et al. 2023, Living Reviews in Relativity, 26, 2
Andreoni, I., et al. 2024, Astroparticle Physics, 155, 102904
Awiphan, S., Kerins, E., & Robin, A. C. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 1666
Belokurov, V., & Kravtsov, A. 2024, MNRAS, 528, 3198
Bergsten, G. J., Pascucci, I., Mulders, G. D., Fernandes, R. B., & Koskinen, T. T. 2022, AJ, 164,
190
Bica, E., Ortolani, S., Barbuy, B., & Oliveira, R. A. P. 2024, A&A, 687, A201
Book, L. G., & Flanagan, É. É. 2011, Phys. Rev. D, 83, 024024
Boone, K., et al. 2021a, ApJ, 912, 70
—. 2021b, ApJ, 912, 71
Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., et al. 2010, Science, 327, 977
Brammer, G. B., van Dokkum, P. G., Franx, M., et al. 2012, ApJS, 200, 13
Brandt, T. D., Rizzo, M., Groff, T., et al. 2017, Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments,
and Systems, 3, 048002
Bringhurst, R. 2005, The Elements of Typography, 3rd edn. (Hartley & Marks)
Bryson, S., Kunimoto, M., Kopparapu, R. K., et al. 2021, The Astronomical Journal, 161, 36, aDS
Bibcode: 2021AJ....161...36B
Burke, C. J., Christiansen, J. L., Mullally, F., et al. 2015, ApJ, 809, 8
Cao, L., Mao, S., Nataf, D., Rattenbury, N. J., & Gould, A. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 595
Cassan, A., Kubas, D., Beaulieu, J. P., et al. 2012, Nature, 481, 167
Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 823, 102
Crociati, C., Valenti, E., Ferraro, F. R., et al. 2023, ApJ, 951, 17
Cumming, A., Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2008, PASP, 120, 531
Dalessandro, E., Crociati, C., Cignoni, M., et al. 2022, ApJ, 940, 170
DESI Collaboration, Aghamousa, A., Aguilar, J., et al. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1611.00036
Digman, M. C., McEwen, J. E., & Hirata, C. M. 2019, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2019, 004
Dotter, A. 2016, ApJS, 222, 8
Eifler, T., Simet, M., Krause, E., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 1514

– 26 –
Eifler, T., Fang, X., Krause, E., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2411.04088
Eilers, A.-C., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2022, ApJ, 928, 23
El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., Cendes, Y., et al. 2023a, MNRAS, 521, 4323
—. 2023b, MNRAS, 521, 4323
Euclid Collaboration: Mellier, Y., Abdurro’uf, Acevedo Barroso, J., et al. 2024, A&A, accepted,
arXiv:2405.13491
Fakhouri, H. K., et al. 2015, ApJ, 815, 58
Ferraro, F. R., Pallanca, C., Lanzoni, B., et al. 2021, Nature Astronomy, 5, 311
Foley, R. J., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 5991
Fulton, B. J., Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 109
Gandhi, P., Dashwood Brown, C., Zhao, Y., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.16479
Garro, E. R., Minniti, D., & Fernández-Trincado, J. G. 2024, A&A, 687, A214
Gould, A. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2407.06484
Gould, A., Dorsher, S., Gaudi, B. S., & Udalski, A. 2006, Acta Astron., 56, 1
Gould, A., Huber, D., Penny, M., & Stello, D. 2015, Journal of Korean Astronomical Society, 48,
93, _eprint: 1410.7395
Gould, A., Yee, J. C., & Dong, S. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2406.14531
Gratton, R., Bragaglia, A., Carretta, E., et al. 2019, A&A Rev., 27, 8
Grogin, N. A., Kocevski, D. D., Faber, S. M., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 35
Grunblatt, S. K., Wilson, R. F., Winter, A., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.10647
Heger, A., Müller, B., & Mandel, I. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2304.09350
Hirata, C. M., Yamamoto, M., Laliotis, K., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 528, 2533
Hon, M., Huber, D., Kuszlewicz, J. S., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal, 919, 131
Hounsell, R., et al. 2018, ApJ, 867, 23
Huber, D., Pinsonneault, M., Beck, P., et al. 2023, Asteroseismology with the Roman Galactic
Bulge Time-Domain Survey, arXiv:2307.03237
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873, 111
Johnson, C. I., Rich, R. M., Simion, I. T., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 1469
Johnson, S. A., Penny, M., Gaudi, B. S., et al. 2020, AJ, 160, 123
Kenworthy, W. D., et al. 2021, ApJL, 923, 265
Kerins, E., Robin, A. C., & Marshall, D. J. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 1202
Kerins, E., Bachelet, E., Beaulieu, J.-P., et al. 2023a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.10210
Kerins, E., Awiphan, S., Edmondson, K., et al. 2023b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.10202
Kessler, R., et al. 2009, PASP, 121, 1028
Klüter, J., Huston, M. J., Aronica, A., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2411.18821
Knuth, D. E. 1992, arXiv Mathematics e-prints, math/9205211
Koekemoer, A. M., Faber, S. M., Ferguson, H. C., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 36
Kondapally, R., et al. 2021, A&A, 648, A3

– 27 –
Koshimoto, N., Baba, J., & Bennett, D. P. 2021, ApJ, 917, 78
Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Kupfer, T., Danielski, C., Gandhi, P., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.14956
Kupfer, T., Korol, V., Littenberg, T. B., et al. 2024, ApJ, 963, 100
Lam, C. Y., Lu, J. R., Hosek, Jr., M. W., Dawson, W. A., & Golovich, N. R. 2020, ApJ, 889, 31
Lam, C. Y., Lu, J. R., Udalski, A., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933, L23
Lam, C. Y., Abrams, N., Andrews, J., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.12514
Lamberts, A., Blunt, S., Littenberg, T. B., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 5888
Marchant, P., & Bodensteiner, J. 2024, ARA&A, 62, 21
Mayor, M., & Queloz, D. 1995, Nature, 378, 355
Merloni, A., Lamer, G., Liu, T., et al. 2024, A&A, 682, A34
Mittelbach, F., & Goossens, M. 2004, The LATEX Companion, 2nd edn. (Addison–Wesley)
Molnár, L., Kalup, C., & Joyce, M. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.12459
Montet, B. T., Yee, J. C., & Penny, M. T. 2017, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific, 129, 044401
Mróz, P., Udalski, A., Skowron, J., et al. 2019, ApJS, 244, 29
Murakami, Y. S., et al. 2023, JCAP, 2023, 046
Musella, I., Leccia, S., Molinaro, R., et al. 2024, ApJS, 275, 26
National Research Council. 2010, New Worlds, New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics
(Washington, DC: The National Academies Press)
Nunota, K., Sumi, T., Koshimoto, N., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2410.23553
O’Donnell, J. E. 1994, \apj, 422, 158
Oliver, S., et al. 2000, MNRAS, 316, 749
Pardo, K., Chang, T.-C., Doré, O., & Wang, Y. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.14968
Penny, M. T. 2014, ApJ, 790, 142
Penny, M. T., Gaudi, B. S., Kerins, E., et al. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
241, 3, aDS Bibcode: 2019ApJS..241....3P
Penny, M. T., Kerins, E., Rattenbury, N., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 2
Pérez-Villegas, A., Barbuy, B., Kerber, L. O., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 3251
Perlmutter, S., et al. 1999, ApJ, 517, 565
Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., & Marcy, G. W. 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, 110, 19273
Phillips, M. M. 1993, ApJL, 413, L105
Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y., Epstein, C., et al. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series, 215, 19, publisher: IOP ADS Bibcode: 2014ApJS..215...19P
Riess, A. G., et al. 1998, AJ, 116, 1009
Rix, H.-W., Chandra, V., Andrae, R., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 941, 45, publisher:
IOP ADS Bibcode: 2022ApJ...941...45R

– 28 –
Robin, A. C., Reylé, C., Derrière, S., & Picaud, S. 2003, ap, 409, 523
Rose, B. M., et al. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2111.03081
Rubin, D., et al. 2022, arXiv e-prints (astro-ph/2206.10632)
Saha, A., Vivas, A. K., Olszewski, E. W., et al. 2019, ApJ, 874, 30
Sahu, K., & Sajadian, S. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.17725
Sahu, K. C., Anderson, J., Casertano, S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933, 83
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ, 500, 525
Sharma, S., Stello, D., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Huber, D., & Bedding, T. R. 2016, The Astrophysical
Journal, 822, 15, aDS Bibcode: 2016ApJ...822...15S
Silva Aguirre, V., Bojsen-Hansen, M., Slumstrup, D., et al. 2018, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 475, 5487, aDS Bibcode: 2018MNRAS.475.5487S
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Breckinridge, J., et al. 2013, ArXiv e-prints, _eprint: 1305.5425
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1503.03757
Stello, D., Zinn, J., Elsworth, Y., et al. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 835, 83, publisher: IOP
ADS Bibcode: 2017ApJ...835...83S
Street, R. A., Gough-Kelly, S., Lam, C., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.13792
Strolger, L.-G., et al. 2020, ApJ, 890, 140
Sumi, T., & Penny, M. T. 2016, ApJ, 827, 139
Sumi, T., Bennett, D. P., Bond, I. A., et al. 2013, ApJ, 778, 150
Surot, F., Valenti, E., Gonzalez, O. A., et al. 2020, A&A, 644, A140
Suzuki, D., Bennett, D. P., Sumi, T., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 145
Tamura, N., Takato, N., Shimono, A., et al. 2016, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation
for Astronomy VI, ed. C. J. Evans, L. Simard, & H. Takami, 99081M
Terry, S. K., Hosek, Jr., M. W., Lu, J. R., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.12485
Thompson, R. I., Illingworth, G., Bouwens, R., et al. 2005, AJ, 130, 1
To, C.-H., DeRose, J., Wechsler, R. H., et al. 2024, ApJ, 961, 59
Tufte, E. R. 1990, Envisioning Information (Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press)
—. 1997, Visual Explanations (Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press)
—. 2001, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press)
—. 2006, Beautiful Evidence, 1st edn. (Graphics Press, LLC)
Umeki, H. 2008, The geometry package, http://ctan.org/pkg/geometry
Villar, V. A., et al. 2020, ApJ, 905, 94
Wang, Y. 2008, PRD, 77, 123525
Wang, Y., Pardo, K., Chang, T.-C., & Doré, O. 2021, Phys. Rev. D, 103, 084007
—. 2022a, Phys. Rev. D, 106, 084006
Wang, Y., Zhai, Z., Alavi, A., et al. 2022b, ApJ, 928, 1
Weiss, L. M., Marcy, G. W., Petigura, E. A., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 48

– 29 –
WFIRST Astrometry Working Group, Sanderson, R. E., Bellini, A., et al. 2019, Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 5, 044005
Wilson, R. F., Barclay, T., Powell, B. P., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
269, 5, aDS Bibcode: 2023ApJS..269....5W
Yee, J. C., & Gould, A. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.15037
Zinn, J. C., Stello, D., Elsworth, Y., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
251, 23, publisher: IOP ADS Bibcode: 2020ApJS..251...23Z

– 30 –
C.

Core Community Survey Definition Committee Reports

These reports from the CCS DCs were released in December 2024.

C.1.

High Latitude Wide Area Survey

Roman High Latitude Wide Area Survey Definition
Committee Recommendations
December 2024

1

Executive Summary

Since its inception in New Worlds, New Horizons (National Research Council, 2010), the high-latitude wide
area survey (HLWAS) has been a central element of the Roman mission. One defining goal of the HLWAS
is to probe the origin of cosmic acceleration with accurate and extremely precise measurements of weak
gravitational lensing and galaxy clustering. While the cosmology objectives set the survey’s most demanding
technical requirements, a survey that meets those requirements supports an enormous variety of science
investigations. The broad expected impact of the HLWAS is evident in the 41 white papers submitted for
consideration by our committee, which range from the present-day solar system to the dawn of the first
galaxies and quasars.
Our recommended in-guide survey has three tiers. The Medium tier, which is close in concept to the
design reference mission (DRM) described in the science requirements document (SRD), would cover 2400
deg2 in three imaging bands (Y, J, H)1 and grism spectroscopy, reaching a 5 σ point-source magnitude limit
mAB ∼ 26.4 and a line-flux limit f ∼ 1.5 × 10−16 erg cm−2 s−1 . The Wide tier would cover an additional
2700 deg2 in H-band imaging alone. The Deep tier would reach ∼ 1 mag deeper in seven bands and ∼ 3×
deeper in line flux over 19.2 deg2 , and ∼ 2 mag deeper in Y, J, H over 5 deg2 , covering equatorial fields
accessible to ground-based telescopes in both hemispheres.
For cosmology, the medium and wide tiers will yield measurements of ∼ 6.2 × 108 galaxy shapes for
weak lensing, and grism spectroscopy in the medium tier will measure ∼ 9.3M galaxy redshifts at 1 < z < 2
and ∼ 1.7M galaxy redshifts at 2 < z < 3. The medium tier allows excellent control of weak lensing
systematics with cross-checks among three bands and near-IR + optical (from the Vera C. Rubin Observatory
Legacy Survey of Space and Time, LSST; Ivezić et al. 2019) colors to mitigate chromatic PSF biases and
define accurate photometric redshift bins. The wide tier roughly doubles the statistical power of the weak
lensing survey using less than 25% of the total imaging time. The deep tier provides the essential data for
calibrating photometric redshifts and a wide range of shape measurement and spectroscopic incompleteness
biases.
Each of the three tiers offers distinct value for other science cases. For studies of the most distant galaxies
and of faint objects more generally, the deep tier will be the most important because of its depth and spectral
coverage. The 19.2 deg2 deep tier is ∼0.5 mag deeper at near-IR wavelengths than the HST CANDELS
program (Grogin et al., 2011; Koekemoer et al., 2011), over an area 86× larger. The 5 deg2 of ultra-deep
YJH imaging will reach a depth similar to NICMOS observations of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field (Thompson
et al., 2005), over an area 1900× larger. Deep-tier spectroscopy will reach a flux limit similar to that of 3-D
HST (Brammer et al., 2012) over an area 100 times larger. The denser time sampling of the deep tier will
make it valuable for solar system science and some time-domain applications.
1 We frequently use Y, J, H in this report to refer to the Roman F106, F129, and F158 filters, respectively. When referring to
other Roman filters we give the wavelength specification, but we sometimes write, e.g., Z087 or K213 to indicate the approximately
corresponding ground-based filter.

1

The 2400 deg2 medium tier reaches a completely new regime for Hubble-resolution near-IR imaging,
an unprecedented resource for the study of local galaxies, Milky Way stellar populations, and the relation
between galaxies and dark matter over a vast span of redshift. The spectroscopic survey will be ∼ 3 times
denser than the Euclid redshift survey at z = 1.5 (Euclid Collaboration: Mellier et al., 2024), and the
measurement of z > 2 structure with ∼ 3M [O III] emission-line galaxies is unique.
For many science cases, even a single band of Hubble-resolution near-IR imaging is a transformative
resource, especially in combination with ground-based LSST imaging. The 2700 deg2 wide tier more than
doubles the area coverage of the HLWAS in the H band, and it lays the ground for a much larger area sky
survey that could be pursued in Roman’s extended mission. The cosmological impact of the wide tier will
be amplified by overlap with X-ray maps from eROSITA (Merloni et al., 2024) and by lensing and Sunyaev–
Zeldovich maps from CMB surveys.
Table 1 summarizes the properties of our in-guide recommendation for the HLWAS.

Table 1: Breakdown of the areas and properties of the recommended in-guide survey.

2

2
2.1

CCS Definition Committee Process
Charge to the Committee

The charge to the HLWAS Definition Committee (HLWASDC) is to provide recommendations to the Roman
Time Allocation Committee (ROTAC) for the design of the survey that Roman will carry out as the HLWAS.
The high-level aim of this committee, like all the CCS Definition Committees, is to “maximize the overall science return of Roman’s wide field infrared surveys while meeting Mission requirements focused on
cosmology and exoplanets”.

2.2

Survey time allocations for underguide, nominal, and overguide

The HLWAS was allocated a nominal observing time of a total of 520 days in the Roman prime mission, and
our “in-guide” survey plan is based on that observing time. We also considered the allocated overguide and
underguide observing times, which were 540 and 480 days, respectively. The bulk of the survey definition
in this report is focused on the “in-guide” survey design. As discussed below, the committee determined
that optimal use of the over- and underguide time would come from a relatively straightforward change to
the observing plan, by increasing or decreasing the area of the single-band, imaging-only Wide Tier. The
recommendations for over- and underguide plans are described in Section 5.3.

2.3

Committee membership

The committee members were selected by the Roman project to have wide-ranging background and expertise in the science enabled by the HLWAS. The committee included representatives from the two Project
Infrastructure Teams whose work is related to HLWAS, one regarding the spectroscopic survey (Project Infrastructure for the Roman Galaxy Redshift Survey, led by Yun Wang), and the other regarding the imaging
survey (Maximizing Cosmological Science with the Roman High Latitude Imaging Survey, led by Olivier
Doré).
These twelve HLWASDC members are:
• Micaela Bagley (Univ. of Texas Austin)
• Keith Bechtol (Univ. of Wisconsin)
• Michael Blanton (New York Univ.)
• Ryan Hickox (Dartmouth College; Committee co-chair)
• Christopher Hirata (Ohio State Univ.)
• Elisabeth Krause (Univ. of Arizona)
• Nikhil Padmanabhan (Yale Univ.; Representative of the spectroscopic PIT)
• Ismael Tereno (IA, Univ. of Lisbon, Portugal; ESA-appointed scientist)
• Anja von der Linden (Stony Brook Univ.)
• Risa Wechsler (Stanford Univ.; Committee co-chair)
• David Weinberg (Ohio State Univ.; Representative of the imaging PIT)
• Aaron Yung (Space Telescope Science Institute)

3

The committee also included two liaisons to provide input on solar system science:
• Susan Benecchi (Planetary Science Institute)
• Rosemary Pike (Center for Astrophysics — Harvard & Smithsonian)
as well as “ex officio” members from the Roman project team:
• Lee Armus (IPAC)
• Tom Barclay (GSFC)
• Karoline Gilbert (STScI)
• Charles-Philippe Lajoie (STScI)
• Julie McEnery (GSFC)
• Takahiro Morishita (IPAC)
• Cristina Oliveira (STScI)
• Javier Sanchez (STScI)
Throughout the committee process, a great deal of programmatic and technical support was provided by
members of the Roman project and Science Centers.

2.4

Survey definition process

The HLWAS survey definition process consisted of a broad effort collecting relevant inputs and information,
followed by a process of determining and refining the recommendations. The overall process is described
here.
2.4.1

Meetings and avenues for input

1. Committee meetings. – The primary avenue for discussion among the committee was regular video
calls, typically one hour in duration. Weekly telecons started in February 2024 and continued through
the spring, with a detailed discussion of community white papers and science pitches. In the summer,
these calls were less frequent, with work being done in working groups. In fall 2024 the full committee telecons returned to a weekly cadence, with additional (twice-weekly) meetings in November
and December to finalize recommendations and report. Committee discussions comprised a total of
approximately 40 meetings over 10 months.
2. Community white papers and science pitches. – A great deal of input to the CCS definition process
came from white papers and science pitches submitted by the community, as discussed in detail below. In winter and spring 2024, the committee read and discussed all submitted white papers. Each
white paper was assigned to committee members who led a summary and discussion of the paper in
a committee meeting. Likewise, science pitches relevant to HLWAS were considered in committee
discussions.
3. Working groups. – In summer 2024, the committee was divided into four working groups that examined
key areas of the survey trade space. One of these assessed the details of a potential wide tier in our
multi-tiered strategy, while the other three groups addressed aspects of the medium and deep tiers:
depth/area/bands, field placement, and observing parameters (cadence, roll angles, etc.)

4

4. Community Town Halls. – The HLWASDC, along with the other CCS committees, participated in
multiple Town Halls to provide updates to the community on the survey definition process. There was
one such presentation at the Roman science conference in Pasadena, CA in July 2024, followed by two
virtual Town Hall meetings in August and September 2024.
5. Engagement with PITs. – The formal engagement of the HLWASDC with the two PITs took place
in early September 2024. Requests for input, in the form of a list of questions, were sent to each
PIT, with responses from the PITs in the form of slides and presentations to the committee, received
in mid-October 2024. The PIT requests, and responses, discussed in more detail in Appendix B.
Throughout the process, less formal engagement with PITs took place via the PIT members serving on
the HLWASDC who provided updates and feedback to the committee discussions.
2.4.2

Process for determining recommendations

The process of determining and refining the committee’s final recommendations started with discussion of the
responses from the PITs to the committee’s questions. The PITs each provided a set of recommendations for
an observing strategy (for imaging and spectroscopy, respectively) that could be carried out in the available
in-guide observing time. The committee then took these responses as a point from which to examine the
trade spaces around various survey parameters, which is discussed in detail in the next section. This trade
space was ultimately narrowed down to a set of point designs that were used to evaluate and choose the
recommended in-guide survey and the options for overguide and underguide.

3
3.1

Science motivation
Science Requirements and Figures of Merit for Cosmology

One of the primary motivations for the HLWAS is to provide tight constraints on cosmological parameters and
stringent tests of cosmological models. Figures of Merit (FoMs) for cosmological experiments are typically
defined in terms of the forecast uncertainties on cosmological parameters, and they are often chosen to scale
as an inverse variance, so that the FoM scales positively with the data volume (e.g., the fraction of sky
covered) if all other parameters are held fixed.
The value of an FoM depends on what space of cosmological parameters is being considered, including
parameters that are not part of the FoM itself but must be marginalized over when inferring constraints
on the target parameters. It also depends on what systematics are being considered (often described by
nuisance parameters that must also be marginalized over), on what external data are presumed available
to set additional constraints, and on modeling assumptions such as the range of scales that can be used
before theoretical systematics become dominant. Despite these complications, sensibly chosen FoMs will
usually give similar guidance on how to make trade decisions to optimize performance — e.g., depth vs. area
— provided one makes consistent assumptions while examining these trades. For this reason, the Roman
Science Requirements Document (SRD) defined requirements relative to the performance expected for a
reference survey, covering 2000 deg2 in 4-band imaging and grism spectroscopy with specified depth.
The trickiest issue in using an FoM to guide survey design is that performance may be limited by systematics that are either unknown or difficult to quantify at a level that can be incorporated into an FoM
calculation. A calculation that considers statistical errors alone tends to favor “data volume”, e.g., number of
galaxy redshifts or shape measurements. Systematics control often requires higher “data quality”, e.g., depth
or filter coverage, making each measurement more expensive. Drawing on the expertise of the High Latitude Imaging Survey (HLIS) and High Latitude Spectroscopic Survey (HLSS) Project Infrastructure Teams
(PITs)2 , we have tried to balance these considerations appropriately in our design recommendations.
2 Details of the Roman PITs are available at: https://roman.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/Roman teamlist pit.html.
In this report, we will refer to the “Maximizing Cosmological Science with the Roman High Latitude Imaging Survey” PIT (PI O. Doré)
and the “Project Infrastructure for the Roman Galaxy Redshift Survey” PIT (PI Y. Wang) as the HLIS PIT and HLSS PIT, respectively.

5

For weak lensing (WL), the FoM adopted in the SRD is the inverse square of the 1-σ fractional error on
σ8 , considered to be a single free parameter that linearly scales the amplitude of matter fluctuations at all
redshifts. The SRD FoM is based on cosmic shear only, and because the cosmic shear power spectrum scales
with σ82 , the defined FoM is effectively a quantification of (SNR)2 , where SNR is the aggregate signal-to-noise
ratio of the cosmic shear power spectrum measurement. There are important subtleties to SNR, however, such
as the correlated statistical errors at small angular scales that arise from non-linear evolution of structure. We
expect that Roman WL data will also provide important constraints on cosmological parameters through
galaxy–galaxy lensing, lensing by galaxy clusters, and cross-correlation with lensing maps of the cosmic
microwave background (CMB lensing). These different analysis approaches tend to pull in similar but not
identical directions in trade decisions.
For the galaxy redshift survey (GRS), the SRD adopts one FoM for baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO)
and one for redshift-space distortion (RSD). BAO measure the angular diameter distance DA and the Hubble
parameter H as functions of redshift. The BAO FoM is the inverse of the product of the 1-sigma statistical
errors on an overall scaling of DA (z) and H(z) over the redshift range 1 < z < 3. The RSD FoM is the
inverse square of the fractional error on the growth rate parameter σm (z)f (z) over the same redshift range.
These two FoMs have similar scaling with survey area and galaxy density because BAO and RSD constraints
are both derived from the galaxy power spectrum on comparable scales.
The requirements defined in the SRD include some margin relative to the expected performance of the
reference survey (itself an evolution of the notional survey in Spergel et al. 2015). That margin is allocated
to several potential contributions in each case, with a factor of 0.85 coming from a lower survey area of 1700
deg2 vs. 2000 deg2 . From the point of view of the HLWAS design, therefore, it is reasonable to take the
requirement on the forecast of the FoM to be 0.85 of the forecast for the reference survey.
The reference survey was expected to require approximately 600 days of observing time. Although the
in-guide time for the HLWAS is lower, at 520 days, we expect our recommended strategies for the imaging
and spectroscopic surveys to exceed the FoM requirements (including the 0.85 factor) and even exceed the
forecast FoM of the reference survey itself. This is partly a consequence of better observatory performance
relative to the SRD assumptions, in particular lower slew+settle times and lower read noise in the detectors.
It is also a consequence of design choices that yield higher statistical performance for a given amount of
observing time — basically, trading greater area for shallower depth and/or less filter coverage. We believe
that our recommended strategies will still allow control of systematics at the level needed to meet the science
requirements. We give further details of the trade decisions and forecasts in Sections 4 and 5 below.

3.2

Summary of White Papers, Science Pitches, and other community feedback

The High Latitude Wide Area Survey core community survey definition committee analyzed the community
input contributed in 38 submitted white papers and 52 science pitches. We also considered three additional
white papers previously submitted to the Early Definition Astrophysics Survey that are relevant in the context
of the HLWAS footprint placement. We include the questions used in our discussion in Appendix A.
The science scope of the 41 white papers touches all scales of Astrophysics and can be distributed among
the following broad categories: cosmology (6), galaxies (10), local Universe (7), solar system (3), and synergies with other surveys (15). A non-exhaustive list of topics addressed by the white papers and the pitches
includes large-scale structure in the early universe, CMB lensing, cosmic infrared background fluctuations,
cosmic distance ladder, low-mass strong lensing systems, measurements of dark matter substructure, environmental dependence of galaxy quenching, the formation of bulges, the characteristics of proto-clusters,
studies of the high redshift universe including the search for z > 10 galaxies and the discovery of the earliest
quasars and AGN, measuring the structure of galaxies’ dark matter halos through their globular cluster populations, detection of stellar streams and halos, discovering substellar populations characterizing substructure
and satellite galaxies in the MW’s halo, and characterizing the orbits and surface compositions of small solar
system bodies.
We are grateful to the PITs for their responsiveness and valuable inputs to the committee’s work.

6

Most submissions present science cases that would benefit from modifications or extensions to the baseline Design Reference Mission. The proposals include suggestions for area, depth, filters, cadences, and
footprint location, both for the imaging and the spectroscopy surveys. Some proposals suggest observing
strategies and exposure times, while others give no details on the survey design needed to achieve the science
cases. A few cases do not address survey properties but express concerns about other aspects of the mission,
such as data archival, data processing, the definition of optimal figures-of-merit, or the need to observe standard reference fields for calibration. Some of the suggested scenarios would be difficult to implement in a
reference mission and were considered more appropriate for future submissions to the General Astrophysics
program. In general, the white papers give more details on survey design than the shorter science pitches. In
the following, we summarize the suggestions for survey properties addressed in the white papers.
Area: A number of white papers suggest an increase of the reference wide survey area, trading off with a
decrease in number of filters or number of passes, benefiting different science cases. It is argued that a larger
area improves dark energy cosmological constraints from WL, and also increases the number of massive
clusters. It also provides the opportunity to measure distances to thousands of galaxies out to hundreds
of Mpc for independent measures of the Hubble constant, and provides tremendous impact on astrometry,
star–galaxy separation, and other aspects of the nearby universe. Some examples of proposed coverages are:
• Full sky coverage at the reference depth, yielding high-resolution images of nearly every object in the
sky. If observed at multiple epochs (at least two passes), it would enable the measurement of the proper
motions of MW stars. Full sky coverage could be achieved in the in-guide time if the survey was carried
out in the single broad filter (F146) filter, at the cost of undersampled imaging and overhead-dominated
operations.
• Wide area of 18,000 deg2, matching Rubin observatory’s LSST footprint, again in the F146 filter.
The synergy with LSST has many benefits, such as improving photo-z estimation, Rubin deblending,
yielding a sample of faint resolved stellar populations, etc.
Multiple tiers are scenarios where parts of the HLWAS footprint are covered with different strategies, such
as different depths or usage of filters. A suggestion is an 18,000 deg2 wide tier observed in a single band,
accompanied by a 1,000 deg2 medium tier observed in the four nominal bands for controlling systematics.
The two tiers would fit into the in-guide time.
Deep tier: The DRM contains a deep component designed for calibration of the cosmological measurements.
Some of the white papers make suggestions regarding location and properties of the deep tier with the goal
of enhancing its scientific potential. Some examples are:
• Covering the Euclid Deep Fields, possibly adding K-band observations. This would include covering
the EDF-North in the northern ecliptic pole, which is far from the reference footprint.
• Revisiting small areas of the footprint of the reference survey in all available 8 imaging passbands,
resulting in a set of deeper fields of various depths and sizes. These deep fields would enable a broad
variety of galaxy evolution studies.
• Overlapping the LSST Deep Drilling Fields.
• Placing the deep fields in the continuous viewing zone area (within 36 deg of the ecliptic poles) to
enable a diverse range of roll angles, and thus a diversity of dispersion directions for better mitigation
of overlap between spectra of unrelated objects.
F213 filter (K-band): There are several suggestions to include the longer wavelength passband to enable
science cases across a broad range of scales, from the detection of large samples of high-z bright galaxies and proto-clusters to the characterization of dust-obscured transient populations, ultra-cool dwarfs, and
extragalactic star clusters. Proposed strategies include:
7

• Performing the reference survey, adding the additional filter to the reference set of 4 filters.
• Replacing the shorter wavelength Y-band with the K-band.
• Selecting specific regions of the sky to be observed in the K-band.
Number of epochs is another property of survey design. There are proposals of multiple visits of the HLWAS,
possibly trading off with the number of filters. The suggestions can be grouped in the two following contexts:
• Transients and fast-moving objects. Multiple epochs are needed to detect transient effects for various
science cases, such as improving the distance ladder with observations of AGB variable stars, characterizing transient populations, or for proper motions and discovery of solar system small bodies.
• Grism spectroscopy. Observations from multiple points of the orbit deliver multiple position angles
and thus a diversity of dispersion directions. One specific science case mentioned is the need to distinguish the spectra from source galaxies and foreground lenses in observations of Extreme emission line
galaxies at cosmic noon.
Dithering: One paper mentions modifications in dithering in the context of optimizing the HLWAS for low
surface brightness astronomy. The HLWAS provides an opportunity to explore new science in the LSB
Universe. It has adequate depth, filters, long exposures, high imaging resolution (provided it stays clear from
sources of contamination and applies LSB-dedicated data reduction). It would need, however, larger dither
steps to minimize reflections in the optical path.
Custom surveys: There was a broad range of suggestions to extend a reference survey by including custom
surveys. The committee considers that some of them would be more appropriate for the General Astrophysics
Surveys (GAS) program. Some examples are:
• A survey of 100 deg2 observed in the two short-wavelength filters F087 and F106 to detect low-mass
dark matter substructure through strong lensing.
• A 500 deg2 survey fully covering one object in the local volume (Andromeda galaxy and the Sculptor
group were suggested), in two bands for colors, in two epochs for proper motions and deeper than the
reference survey for characterization of ultra-faint dwarfs, stellar streams, satellite populations, etc.
• Adding an area at low ecliptic latitudes to be revisited with a high cadence would enable the discovery
of Solar System small bodies and also, with an appropriate choice of filters, some characterization of
TNOs.
• The “Roman Cosmic Noon Survey”, a proposal for a 10 deg2 deep spectroscopic survey (8h per pointing) in the continuous viewing zone to study proto-clusters in their cosmic web environment. The
proposal also includes imaging and has legacy value beyond the main science case.
Synergies: A number of papers advocate the benefits of overlapping HLWAS with other surveys or wellestablished astronomical fields. Besides the already mentioned Rubin’s LSST and Euclid, other cases specifically mentioned are: the SPT-3G survey (enabling cross-correlation with CMB), HERA radio telescope
(cross-correlations with 21cm to constrain reionization), the Stripe 82-XL (with multi-wavelength coverage
including X-ray), and the future CASTOR space telescope. There are also several papers devoted to synergies with Subaru in the context of a set of 100 Subaru nights committed to Roman–Subaru synergistic
observations. In this context a few suggestions are made:
• HLWAS overlapping with the Subaru HSC Deep areas (27 deg2 ) using Roman spectroscopy and imaging (including K-band) for large-scale structures and galaxy formation studies.
• A 100 deg2 survey on the HSC-W-HectoMap Subaru survey for better identifying low-z interlopers.
8

• HLWAS footprint accessible from Subaru to enable a follow-up HSC survey in 16 Medium-Band filters,
and a follow-up with the future ULTIMATE-Subaru instrument.

4

Trade Considerations and Recommended In-Guide Survey

We assume from the outset that the HLWAS will include a deep tier, taking roughly 10% of the observing
time, and one or more tiers that cover a much larger area. The deep tier is required for calibration observations
that enable scientific exploitation of the large area survey, and for some science applications (e.g., studies of
very high redshift) the deep tier will be the most valuable component of the HLWAS. Here, we focus first
on the science trades that govern the large area tiers before turning to a discussion of the deep tier. Our
quantitative discussions focus on the cosmological applications, but our choices of how to resolve these trade
considerations also reflect our assessment of the broader science cases raised in the white papers and our
internal discussions.

4.1

Trade space for the imaging survey

4.1.1

General considerations

At fixed total observing time, the primary trades to be considered in the imaging survey are survey area vs.
exposure time and number of filters. The DRM adopted an imaging survey of 2000 deg2 in Y, J, H, and F184,
with individual exposure times of 140 sec and a scan pattern in which most points on the sky are covered by
5 exposures.
At the time of the DRM, the science team was not confident that weak lensing (WL) measurements could
be made in Y-band, which is the least well sampled by the 0.11-arcsec pixels. The inclusion of F184 in
the DRM was motivated partly by the desire to make WL measurements in 3 bands, allowing cross-checks
among 3 auto-correlations and 3 cross-correlations. F184 imaging also provides additional information for
photometric redshifts (photo-z’s). However, F184 imaging is less sensitive than Y, J, and H because of the
thermal background, and algorithm development by the HLIS PIT (Hirata et al., 2024) and ground measurements of the pixel response have demonstrated that reliable image combination and WL measurements are
feasible with Y-band sampling. The HLIS PIT, therefore, recommended dropping F184 from the large area
tiers, and we have adopted that recommendation, focusing our attention on Y, J, and H.
As discussed more thoroughly in the technical implementation section, the HLIS PIT recommended an
imaging strategy in which there are two time-separated passes at different roll angles, and the imaging in
each filter in each pass has 3 dither positions. Their detailed simulation tests with an implemented image
combination algorithm demonstrate that this 3x2 strategy yields adequate sampling for WL measurements.
They investigated alternative dither/pass strategies that can cover a given sky area in less total observing time,
but they found that these strategies led to worrisomely anisotropic PSF shapes in the reconstructed images.
We have therefore adopted the HLIS PIT’s recommendation of the 3×2 strategy for the large area components
of the HLWAS imaging.
4.1.2

Depth vs. area

Figure 1 shows the total number of WL shapes measured in 100 days of observing time in a given filter,
including the F184 filter and the wide F146 filter, as a function of the exposure time. The wide filter gives the
highest source density, as expected. However, the HLIS PIT judges F146 imaging to be unreliable for WL
because of large chromatic PSF systematics that arise from the difference in SED shapes between stars and
galaxies across the wide filter. We therefore do not consider F146 as an option for the large-area tiers (see
further discussion in Section 4.5). Of the standard medium-width filters, H-band (F158) is the most sensitive
and F184 the least.
The key takeaway from Figure 1 is that the total number of galaxy shape measurements, Ntot = A × neff ,
per unit observing time is nearly constant over a broad range of exposure times, with texp of 91 sec or 149
9

Figure 1: Total number of galaxy shape measurements (left) and total survey area (right) as a function of the
adopted exposure time, for a total observing time of 100 days at ecliptic latitude of 45 deg and the 3 × 2
dither/pass pattern. The WL effective source density neff is computed in each filter for sky locations covered
by five of the six exposures, with a S/N>18 cut assumed for WL sources. In the right panel, the dotted curve
shows a simple Area ∝ 1/texp scaling, while the solid curve includes the impact of slew+settle overheads.
sec giving values just 1.2% lower than the maximum achieved at texp = 116 sec. At shorter texp , Ntot
drops because of the growing impact of overheads and read noise. Forecasts from the HLIS PIT (shown
below) indicate that the cosmological FoM scales approximately with Ntot . Because galaxy number counts
are well approximated by power laws, we expect the total number of galaxy detections above a specified
S/N threshold to follow the same scaling as Ntot , with a different normalization, so optimizing Ntot also
optimizes the statistics for a broad range of extragalactic science cases.
The right panel of Figure 1 shows the area covered per 100 days for a single-filter survey. The divergence
between the solid curve and the dotted A ∝ 1/texp curve shows the impact of overheads. At texp = 91 sec
the impact of overheads is about 19%, so a survey with this exposure time remains efficient in terms of area
covered per unit observing time. At texp = 33 sec the inefficiency due to overheads is a factor of 1.8.
Figure 2 shows other properties of the imaging survey as a function of texp : the 5σ magnitude limit,
the WL effective source density, and the estimated median redshift of the WL source sample. The first
two are smooth functions of texp , with read noise causing the curves to steepen at low texp . The median
redshift exhibits a sharper fall-off at short exposure times. In H-band, the median redshift declines rapidly
for texp < 90 sec and climbs slowly for texp > 90 sec.
4.1.3

Cosmological FoM optimization

The HLIS PIT has carried out a number of cosmological FoM calculations with different assumptions about
the model parameter space. In line with the specifications of the SRD, these calculations focus on constraints
from the cosmic shear power spectrum alone. They include contributions to the error covariance matrix from
shape noise, cosmic variance, and non-Gaussian terms, in particular, the correlation of modes that arises
from non-linear evolution of structure. We caution that the forecasts to date are far from exhaustive, and
the parameter space considered is narrower than what would be used in a full cosmological inference. A
full cosmological inference would also likely include other information from the HLWAS (such as galaxy
clustering and galaxy–galaxy lensing) and from external sources (such as the CMB power spectrum and
BAO and supernova measurements from Roman and external surveys).
Figure 3 shows representative results from the HLIS PIT forecasts conducted in response to a request from
our committee. The key takeaway is that the FoM in each of the cases shown scales linearly with neff and with

10

Figure 2: Image statistics as a function of exposure time. Top left shows the 5σ magnitude limit for point
sources (solid) and exponential-profile sources with a 0.3-arcsec scale length (dotted). Top right shows the
effective WL source density in arcmin−2 . Bottom left shows an estimate of the median redshift of the WL
source population.

11

Figure 3: Scaling of FoM with effective source density, based on forecasts from the HLIS PIT. The left panel
uses the FoM adopted by the SRD, the inverse variance of σ8 considered as a single cosmological parameter.
The right panel allows Ωm to vary as well with a Gaussian prior of 0.01, and the FoM is the inverse covariance
of the two parameters. In both panels, the y-axis scales the FoM by A × neff . Blue and black curves show
survey areas of 4000 deg2 and 7000 deg2 , respectively, and dotted curves show the impact of marginalizing
over uncertainties in baryonic physics, which reduce the cosmological information that could otherwise be
obtained from small angular scales (high l). The nearly flat trend of these curves and the similarity of the blue
and black lines shows that these FoM forecasts scale very closely with Ntot = A × neff .
survey area, to a good but not perfect approximation. Dotted curves show the impact of marginalizing over
one important theoretical systematic, the influence of baryonic physics on the small- scale power spectrum.
Accounting for this systematic lowers the cosmological FoM, as expected, but it does not alter the linear
scaling with area and neff . The HLIS PIT has also computed FoM in a w0 − wa parameter space (describing
the equation-of-state of dark energy instead of assuming a cosmological constant), and the linear scaling
behavior is similar.
The bottom line of this analysis is that optimizing the survey for Ntot = A × neff should be close to
optimizing the WL cosmology performance, and that any choice of texp in the range 91–149 sec is close
to this optimum. We expect this to remain true for analyses that include galaxy–galaxy lensing and galaxy
clustering (known in WL parlance as “3x2-point” analyses), though we do not have detailed forecasts to
demonstrate this point. A choice at the low end of the texp range gives larger survey area, and a choice at the
high end gives higher neff , and there are secondary arguments favoring each of these choices.
Advantages of large area
1. At large angular scales (low l), the dominant source of noise in the power spectrum is cosmic variance, which is independent of neff . If the shape of the power spectrum must be constrained from the
Roman data, improving the precision on large scales will give greater dynamic range for P (k) shape
measurements and thus lead to better cosmological constraints.
2. A shallower survey over wider area concentrates more information on linear scales where theoretical
modeling is easier, and it makes spectroscopic calibration of photo-z’s easier because the sources are
not as faint.
3. A wide area increases overlap with CMB lensing surveys and with cluster catalogs and IGM maps from
X-ray and CMB SZ surveys. It is not clear whether the cosmological return from joint analyses still
scales closely with Ntot or instead favors area relative to neff .
4. For many science applications outside of cosmology, there is a big difference between having some
Roman imaging and no Roman imaging, and much less dependence on the depth of that imaging.
12

5. As a specific instance of #4, having Roman imaging can improve the performance of WL analysis from
Rubin/LSST, for image deblending and for photometric redshifts.
Advantages of high neff
1. For the cosmic shear power spectrum, methods that mitigate the impact of super-sample covariance
(e.g., Digman et al. 2019) may help to recover the n2eff scaling of S/N that applies in the shape-noise
dominated regime. However, the effectiveness of these methods for a Roman-like survey has yet to be
demonstrated.
2. For analyses that use higher-order statistics such as the cosmic shear bispectrum, we expect the scaling
of performance with neff to be steeper than linear. Such analyses may lead to significant sharpening of
cosmological constraints relative to 2-point analyses alone, but this is a field in development and the
likely impact of such analyses is difficult to predict.
3. A deeper survey provides greater precision at higher redshift, and a better leverage on redshift-dependence
of the weak lensing signal may improve constraints for some cosmological models.
4. Achieving high neff and WL precision at high redshift are distinctive capabilities of Roman WL relative
to Rubin and Euclid.
4.1.4

Number of filters

The other critical choice besides texp is the number of filters. A Y+J+H survey would cover one-third the area
of an H-only survey in the same amount of observing time, but it provides better information about galaxy
photo-z’s, provides better control of chromatic PSF biases, allows cross-checks of WL measurements across
different bands, and provides better SED information for studies of galaxy and quasar evolution, Galactic
structure, and stellar astrophysics. In a purely statistical sense, the “loss” in Ntot from doing 3 filters vs. 1 is
less than a factor of three because one can make shape measurements for fainter galaxies. We have estimated
this effect by applying the S/N > 18 cut to the co-added depth of Y+J+H. We find that neff increases by a
factor of 1.4 relative to H-band only, so Ntot in a 3-band survey is lower by a factor 3/1.4 = 2.15 for fixed
total observing time. An actual analysis of a multi-band survey might not use co-added images, but we expect
the statistical impact to be similar. Results for a 2-band survey (J+H) would be intermediate.
Figure 4, provided by the HLIS PIT, shows measures of photo-z performance for the combination of
Rubin LSST photometry with Y+J+H, J+H, or H-only photometry from Roman. These simulation forecasts
apply the calibration techniques currently used in the Dark Energy Survey and planned for LSST. Crucially,
they assume that a complete spectroscopic calibration sample of 20k galaxies to the full depth of the Roman
WL survey will be available in the deep tier, which is probably over-optimistic. Under these assumptions,
more bands improve photo-z performance as expected, and the largest degradation from a J+H or H-only
survey relative to Y+J+H occurs at z > 1.2.
On its own, Figure 4 suggests that even an H-band-only survey, in combination with Rubin photometry,
can yield reasonably good photo-z performance. However, we expect the impact of incompleteness in the
spectroscopic calibration sample to be more severe when the number of Roman bands is smaller. The spectroscopic calibration gives the redshift distribution of galaxies in narrow cells of a high-dimensional color
space with precise photometry in the deep tier. These cells are then mapped to tomographic redshift bins
in the shallower tiers. With fewer filters in the shallow tier, a given tomographic bin contains contributions
from a larger number of calibration cells and is more susceptible to bias from incompleteness in those cells.
There are strategies for measuring and mitigating the impact of imperfect spectroscopic calibration, which
involve using the weak lensing and galaxy clustering data themselves, and cross-correlations with spectroscopic surveys such as DESI and the Roman HLSS, to constrain parameterized offsets in the mean or width
of the redshift distribution in tomographic bins. These strategies are an area of active research.
Unfortunately, we (meaning both our committee and the WL community) are not in a position to give a
confident quantitative assessment of the ultimate impact of photo-z calibration systematics on Roman WL
13

Figure 4: Photo-z performance for Y+J+H, J+H, and H-only Roman surveys in combination with ugrizy
photometry from Rubin at 4-year LSST depth. These plots, provided by the HLIS PIT based on the Cardinal
simulation (To et al., 2024), are based on simulations that assume a complete spectroscopic calibration sample
of 20k galaxies in the deep tier and apply the SOMPZ photo-z calibration framework used in the Dark Energy
Survey. Upper panels show photo-z vs. true redshift. Lower panels show statistical measures of photo-z
quality: the mean absolute deviation, the fraction of outliers, and the bias of the mean photo-z in bins of true
redshift. (Image credit: HLIS PIT, B. Andrews and C. To.)

14

cosmology for different assumptions about the survey depth and filter coverage. This is largely because
we do not know how good the spectroscopic calibration sample will ultimately be and additionally because
mitigation strategies are not yet mature enough to allow accurate forecasts of their performance.

4.2

Trade space for the spectroscopic survey

4.2.1

General considerations

For the spectroscopic survey with a given total exposure time and using a single dispersion element, the
trade space can be characterized as a straightforward (roughly inverse) relationship between depth and area.
The main science cases for the HLWAS spectroscopic survey are based on detecting galaxies through their
emission lines, so the depth can be characterized as a limiting emission line flux. The primary spectroscopic
cosmological measurements (BAOs and RSDs) are based upon correlations of galaxies in redshift space,
so the key consideration is the precise measurement of redshift. The required redshift precision of σz <
0.001(1 + z) requires the grism (with R = 435 − 865) rather than the prism. In the wavelength range
covered by the grism (1.0–1.9 µm), the main emission lines for redshifts are Hα for z = 1–2 and [OIII]
for z = 2–3. As with the imaging survey, longer exposures reach deeper emission-line depths and so larger
source densities, whereas larger areas cover larger numbers of sources.
A further consideration concerns the number of exposures and corresponding roll angles at each position.
The PIT calculations assumed 8 total exposures, two each at 4 different roll angles, which is determined to
be optimal for decontamination of the slitless grism spectra (in that there is improvement with additional roll
angles up to four, but little gain for additional rolls). Our forecasts and the recommended observation plan
follow this strategy. The PIT considered three values for the exposure times for single exposures (assuming
8 total exposures): the DRM value (311.2 s) and 3/4 and 1/2 of that (233.4 s and 155.6 s, referred to as
“descoped DRM” and “DRM-Wide”, respectively).
Another related requirement for the spectroscopic survey is the availability of the imaging observations
needed to perform the spectral decomposition. Studies by the PIT indicate that it is critical to have spacebased, high-resolution near-IR imaging to effectively reduce the grism data, so any spectroscopic field must
be covered by associated Roman imaging. The PIT further specified that imaging in at least two NIR filters is
needed to constrain the spectral slope of sources as part of the decontamination process, using the approach
currently being employed by Euclid. While it may in principle be possible to utilize a combination of one
space-based near-IR image and additional ground-based imaging, this approach would require the development of additional data reduction algorithms, the effectiveness of which are not currently well-established.
The committee therefore has recommended that grism observations be entirely covered by imaging in multiple Roman bands.
An additional parameter has to do with the geometry of the spectroscopic field. The PIT report notes that a
single contiguous field, or a small number of individual fields, are optimal for the cosmological measurements
as they minimize the impact of edge effects and window functions. Our recommended HLWAS spectroscopic
field configuration (Section 5.2) consists of two large contiguous fields, the smaller of which is > 300 deg2
and thus well-suited for the cosmological redshift survey measurements. (For a detailed discussion of a
number of considerations for HLWAS spectroscopy, see Wang et al. 2022.)
4.2.2

Depth vs. area

The predictions provided by the HLSS PIT for the area covered, the number of sources with secure redshifts,
and the comoving space density of sources with redshifts are given in Tables 2, 3, and 4. The areas and total
galaxy numbers are scaled to observations that can be carried out in 100 days of Roman observing time, and
so can be adjusted for larger or smaller allocations of time for spectroscopy3 . It is immediately clear that
the area increases inversely with decreasing exposure time. However, the total number of galaxies in the
3 Please note that the calculations used for the PIT forecasts presented in Tables 2–5 differ somewhat from those used to produce the
values given in Table 1; for details of our calculations using the Roman ETC see Section 5.

15

Table 2: Area covered by an HLWAS spectroscopic survey per 100 days of observing time, for different
values of the grism exposure time. Credit: HLSS PIT, Y. Wang.

Table 3: Number of secure redshifts in two redshift bins (z = 1–2 and z = 2–3) per 100 days of Roman
observing time, for different values of the exposure time. Credit: HLSS PIT, Y. Wang.
various redshift bins is mostly insensitive to the choice of exposure time, as the lower density of sources at
lower flux limits is approximately balanced by the larger area. For science cases that depend primarily on the
total number of galaxies (like some of the WL measurements described in the previous section), the science
return is only weakly dependent on exposure time. However, for measurements that depend on additional
parameters such as the populations of galaxies being probed, the density of galaxies, or the total number of
pairs at particular scales, the precision can depend strongly on the trade-off between exposure time and area.
4.2.3

Cosmological FoM optimization

The Roman HLSS PIT provided forecasts of the FoMs for the main BAO and RSD cosmological measurements, as defined in the SRD and as discussed in Section 3.1. These FoMs are scaled to 100 days of observing
time, but scale approximately linearly with larger or smaller time allocations. These FoM estimates clearly
show that shorter exposure times, and correspondingly greater area, are valuable in maximizing both the BAO
and RSD FoMs.
For statistical precision of the cosmological measurements, there is therefore an incentive to increase
the area as much as possible. However, the total possible area is constrained by several factors, including
the availability of multi-band Roman imaging and the potential systematics introduced by lower signal-tonoise of the shallower spectroscopic measurements. There is also some dependence with exposure time
on constraints on the redshift evolution of cosmological parameters, with deeper observations giving better
constraints at high z (Figure 5). A number of general astrophysics science cases benefit from deeper spectroscopic observations to perform detailed emission line analysis, gain access to fainter emission lines, and
probe less luminous galaxy populations.
We note that the absolute values of the FoMs for the RSD measurements provided by the PIT are somewhat lower than the corresponding forecasts presented in the SRD for comparable survey areas and numbers
of redshifts. This difference is due to differing assumptions in the forecasts for the RSD analysis, but the scaling with survey properties should still be similar. The formal science requirements in the SRD are given in
terms of the FoMs that would be achievable from the DRM, with a specified margin, as described in Section
2.1. Our recommended spectroscopic observations satisfy the mission requirements, as discussed in Section
4.4.
16

Table 4: Comoving space density of galaxies with secure redshifts at z = 1.2, 1.5, 1.8, 2.2, and 2.5. The top
value for each table element is the comoving space density n (1/Mpc3 ), while the bottom value is the product
of the space density times the power spectrum nP0.2 ≡ nP (k = 0.2h/Mpc).

Table 5: Forecasted FoMs for the BAO and RSD cosmological measurements (as defined in the SRD, see
Section 3.1), for the three exposure times considered in the PIT analysis, for 100 days of spectroscopic
observations. Credit: HLSS PIT, Y. Wang

Figure 5: Forecasts of the precision in measurements of the Hubble parameter through BAOs (left) and growth
of structure through RSD (right) as a function of redshift, scaled to 200 days of observing time (covering 2000
and 4000 deg2 , respectively). Credit: HLSS PIT, Y. Wang
17

4.3

The deep calibration tier

Our recommendations for the deep tier are based primarily on the data requirements for calibration specified
by the HLIS and HLSS PITs. However, we expect that the deep-tier data will prove enormously powerful for
a wide range of science, reaching depths fainter than the famous CANDELS (Grogin et al., 2011; Koekemoer
et al., 2011) and 3D-HST (Brammer et al., 2012) surveys over an area ∼ 100 times larger.
The priorities specified by the HLIS PIT for deep-tier imaging are to reach at least 10x the effective
exposure time of the medium tier (increasing the limiting magnitude by 1.25 mag) over 20 deg2 and to reach
at least 30x the effective exposure time (+1.85 mag) over part of this area. Effective exposure time is defined
in an inverse variance sense and includes the impact of ecliptic latitude of the deep-tier fields relative to the
median of the medium tier. The 10x depth imaging will be used for photo-z calibration, so it should be carried
out in many bands and in fields that have deep optical imaging and are accessible to powerful spectroscopic
resources. In practice, the spectroscopic facilities for which we can be confident of access to the Roman
community are Subaru PFS (Tamura et al., 2016), DESI (DESI Collaboration et al., 2016), and Keck4 , all in
the northern hemisphere. The 30x depth imaging will be used to test for noise biases on weak lensing shape
measurements, so it is needed only in the Y, J, H bands used for the medium tier.
The priority specified by the HLSS PIT for the deep tier is to obtain spectroscopy with 10 passes, each
equivalent to one pass of the regular spectroscopic survey (which has 2 passes at different roll angles), over an
area of 22 deg2 . These observations should have a range of roll angles, ideally sampling the full 360 degrees,
but at least covering a range around the medium-tier roll angles.
Our recommendations for the deep tier (see Section 4.4) meet these priorities, though the restriction to
fields that can be observed from the northern hemisphere means that we cannot access all roll angles for the
spectroscopy. For many of the science cases presented in white papers, the deep tier will be the single most
valuable component of the HLWAS. This is one reason we include the Z087, F184, and K213 bands in our
recommended 10x imaging; they will be useful for many science cases as well as for improving photo-z
calibration. Although many white papers propose science that will benefit from the deep-tier data, none of
them make a strong case for an area larger than 20 deg2 .

4.4

Recommended in-guide survey design and rationale

We describe the in-guide recommendation for each of the three survey tiers, in turn, with a brief summary
of the rationale drawing on the discussion in Sections 4.1–4.3. We describe details of our recommended
implementation, including field choice, scanning patterns, and scheduling considerations, in Section 5, which
also contains our overguide and underguide recommendations. A summary is in the table given above in the
Executive Summary. The medium and wide tier areas in Table 1 are slightly larger than the round numbers we
give in the text below, because our observing time estimate for the deep tier is slightly shorter than the 70 days
we had initially set aside in our calculations. The areas in the summary table constitute our recommendation,
but these small differences are within the uncertainties of exact time requirements for the survey observing
modes and scheduling constraints.
4.4.1

Big Picture

Relative to the DRM, the key change is the addition of a wide tier of H-band only imaging, enabled by
reduced exposure times and filter coverage in the medium tier. Even in a single band, near-IR imaging at
Roman resolution is valuable for many science cases, especially in combination with Rubin ground-based
imaging. For weak lensing, the addition of the wide tier significantly increases the expected FoM. We elected
to keep the ratio of imaging:spectroscopy in the medium+wide tiers at 2:1, similar to that in the DRM and
earlier studies for WFIRST-AFTA (Spergel et al., 2015). Trade studies shows that the GRS FoM increases
with shorter exposures and larger area at fixed total observing time, and we have moved in this direction
relative to the DRM. However, robust implementation of the GRS also requires Roman imaging in at least
4 https://www2.keck.hawaii.edu/

18

two filters, so it is restricted to the medium tier. We have balanced these considerations by moderately
increasing the area of the medium tier (to 2400 deg2 ) and choosing an exposure time that allows this area to
be covered in approximately 150 days of grism observations. The resulting FoM is somewhat lower than that
of the DRM, which reflects the fact that the 520-day in-guide recommendation for the HLWAS is lower than
the approximately 2 years envisioned for the DRM.
4.4.2

Deep Tier

As the choice of fields for the deep tier, we recommend the two Rubin/ LSST Deep Drilling Fields that are
closest to the equator, COSMOS and XMM-LSS, each of them 9.6 deg2 in area. The equatorial location
makes the fields accessible to both northern and southern hemisphere telescopes, the deep LSST imaging
will provide the optical counterpart to the deep Roman imaging and spectroscopy, and the total area is close
to that requested by the HLIS and HLSS PITs. The ecliptic latitudes of these fields, centered at −9.4 deg
and −17.9 deg, respectively, require additional exposure time to reach the 10x effective exposure time of the
medium tier, but this cost seems worth the benefits.
Per the HLIS PIT request, we recommend a combination of dithers, passes, and exposure time sufficient
to reach a depth equivalent to 10x exposure time at the median ecliptic latitude of the medium tier, over the
full area of the two deep drilling fields in Y, J, and H, and the same total exposure time in Z087, F184, K213,
and W146. We recommend covering 5 deg2 of the COSMOS field to the deeper 30x level in Y, J, and H
only. We recommend including W146 in the deep tier so that the community can test ideas for surveys that
might use only W146, as proposed in some white papers and published articles. The W146 component of the
deep tier may be especially valuable for solar system science, where detection of objects that move between
individual exposures requires the highest sensitivity.
Per the HLSS PIT request, we recommend observing the full area of both deep drilling fields with grism
observations that are individually matched to the dither pattern and exposure time of the medium tier while
covering a wider range of roll angles, with a total depth equivalent to 10x the medium tier exposure time at
its median ecliptic latitude.
With the implementation described in Section 5, we estimate that the deep tier will require a total of 55
days of observing time.
4.4.3

Medium Tier

For the medium tier, we recommend a survey area of 2400 deg2 in Y, J, and H imaging bands and grism
spectroscopy. For the imaging, we recommend a strategy of two passes at distinct roll angles, with 3 dither
positions per filter in each pass, and an exposure time of 107.25 sec. Details are given in Section 5. For the
spectroscopy we recommend a strategy of four passes at distinct roll angles, with two dither positions in each
pass and an exposure time of 189.75 sec.
For both imaging and spectroscopy, this medium tier is similar to the originally envisioned, 2000 deg2
DRM, but the imaging is somewhat shallower and no longer includes F184, the spectroscopy is shallower,
and the area is larger. (DRM exposure times were 140 sec in imaging and 311 sec in spectroscopy.)
For the imaging survey, we estimate neff = 41.3 arcmin−2 at the median ecliptic latitude and a total
number of weak lensing shape measurements Ntot = 3.6 × 108 . This is nearly identical to the predicted Ntot
for the DRM observing strategy. Since our FoM forecasts (from the HLIS PIT) scale with this total number
of shape measurements, this implies that the medium tier alone has a WL statistical power comparable to the
estimate for the DRM, even before the addition of the wide tier.
For the spectroscopic survey, we estimate a total of 14.2M Hα redshifts, 3.6M [O III] redshifts, and 1.3M
[O II] redshifts. Of these, 11M are at z > 1 and 1.7M are at z > 2. (To account for the adopted texp and
effects such as chip gaps and ecliptic latitude variations, we carried out these estimates separately from the
HLSS PIT, using the Roman ETC. Because the assumptions are different, our estimated yields are somewhat
different from those provided by the HLSS PIT.) For FoM estimates, we interpolated the calculations from
the HLSS PIT (see Table 5). We find that the medium tier GRS would give a BAO FoM about 0.83 times

19

that of the DRM (assuming 2000 deg2 and 311.2 sec exposures for the latter), with a similar ratio for RSD.
This is close to the SRD requirement of 0.85. (Recall that the SRD specifies that the FoMs should exceed the
DRM FoM divided by 1.5, with a factor of 0.85 of that margin attributed to survey area.)
We estimate that the medium tier will require 212 days of imaging and 158 days of spectroscopy, so 370
days total.
We seriously considered adopting shorter exposures of 91 sec for imaging and 155 sec for spectroscopy,
which would have allowed the medium tier to cover more area in the same amount of observing time. We
opted for the longer exposures of 107 sec and 190 sec to stay safely away from rapid falloffs in the galaxy
number densities and to lean towards the high neff and high spectroscopic number density that are distinctive
features of Roman relative to Euclid. Furthermore, while area would be relatively easy to add in an extended
mission, the depth difference between these exposure times would not (in particular, time lost to overheads
cannot be recovered), so it seems prudent to err on the side of depth. Greater depth is also valuable for galaxy
evolution studies at higher redshift, which is another distinctive strength of Roman.
4.4.4

Wide Tier

For the wide tier, we recommend applying all time remaining after accounting for the deep and medium tiers
to an H-band only survey, with the same 107 s exposure time used for H-band in the medium tier. With 70
days for the deep tier and 370 days for the medium tier, the in-guide allocation of 520 days for the HLWAS
leaves 80 days for the wide tier, sufficient to survey 2700 deg2 .
For WL, the predicted effective surface density is neff = 26.7 arcmin−2 at the median ecliptic latitude,
comparable to that anticipated for Euclid and LSST. The total number of shape measurements is 2700 ×
3600 × 26.7 = 2.6 × 108 vs. 3.6 × 108 for the medium tier. Thus, with about 25% of the imaging time, the
wide tier can nearly double the number of WL shape measurements, which should increase the FoM by the
same factor if the cosmological interpretation remains statistics limited. There is greater risk that the wide
tier WL will be limited by systematics, but we are optimistic that these can be adequately controlled given
guidance from the deep and medium tiers.
The 2700 deg2 of wide tier imaging will be valuable for many science applications, especially those that
exploit overlap with other surveys (such as LSST, CMB experiments, and eROSITA) and Galactic studies,
where structure is not statistically homogeneous across the sky. In addition to the value on its own, we view
the wide tier as a “down payment” towards a much larger area H-band survey that could be undertaken in an
extended mission if the science arguments for more sky coverage are strong enough (see Section 8).

4.5

Roads not taken

The clearest case of a “road not taken” in our recommended implementation of the HLWAS is a wide area
tier using the W146 filter, which can reach roughly 0.8 mag deeper and neff ∼ 1.6× higher in the same texp
relative to H158 (see Figures 1 and 2). Thus, with W146 we could reduce texp and cover wider area. One
ambitious white paper proposed an aggressive scan strategy that would cover sky area very rapidly to a depth
mAB ∼ 25 in W146 but with undersampled images.
We decided at the outset that all HLWAS imaging should follow a scan strategy that allows image reconstruction adequate for WL shape measurements. While some astrophysics can be pursued with undersampled
images, analysis is harder in the best of cases and nearly impossible in others. For a data set as large and with
as broad uses as the HLWAS, we regard recovery of fully sampled imaging as a requirement.
Our primary reason for choosing H158 rather than W146 for the wide tier imaging is the concern raised
by the HLIS PIT that W146 imaging would not be usable for WL analysis because of chromatic PSF bias
that arises from difference in SED shape between stars and galaxies. This effect scales roughly as the square
of the filter width. Figure 6, provided by the HLIS PIT, shows that predicted multiplicative bias in shear
measurement for the W146 band is about 2%. This is 100 times larger than the shear calibration requirement
specified in the SRD (dark gray band), and 20 times larger than even a relaxed requirement (light gray band)
that allows for self-calibration of shear bias from the WL correlation measurements themselves. Colored

20

lines show some possible mitigation strategies, and while it is conceivable that these would advance to the
required level by the time the survey is available, the simulations that produce these predictions are themselves
simplified in the assumed range of SED shapes. Relying on undeveloped mitigation strategies to achieve a
factor of 20–100 improvement relative to the “raw” chromatic PSF bias seems too risky.
Chromatic PSF bias is also an issue for H158 imaging only, as we will not have galaxy-by-galaxy information about the near-IR SED shape. However, the raw effect is 10 times smaller in the narrower filter, and it
seems likely that mitigation strategies can bring it to an acceptable level. Chromatic PSF bias remains a risk
for the H-band only wide tier, but we regard this risk as small.
While the W146 filter reaches greater depth in a given exposure time, it is a broad, non-standard filter, and
it provides less SED-shape discrimination when combined with LSST photometry. For some applications, the
gain in sensitivity with W146 may be outweighed by the reduced SED information. The inclusion of W146
imaging in the deep tier will allow testing of W146-only strategies for many science cases, including WL
cosmology. Conceivably, by the time the wide tier imaging begins, these tests will have established W146
as a robust and better alternative to H158. However, we strongly recommend H158 rather than W146 as the
baseline.
Another “road not taken” is to reduce or even eliminate the medium tier, 3-band survey in favor of maximizing the survey area in H158, a strategy advocated in some white papers. In the absence of systematics, an
H-band only survey would yield higher Ntot and higher WL FoM than the 3-band survey. However, we regard the control and testing of WL systematics and the greater astrophysical information on detected objects
to be hallmark strengths of the HLWAS, especially as a complement to Euclid. We therefore elected to retain
a medium tier comparable to the original 2000 deg2 DRM. Furthermore, the spectroscopic survey requires
at least two bands for robust discrimination of possible contaminants. Allowing some of the survey area to
be J+H+grism rather than Y+J+H+grism would have increased the time available for the wide tier, but we
decided that the greater complexity of having three “layers” of survey in addition to the deep tier would not
be worth a fairly modest gain in area.
A final “road not taken” is to eliminate the wide tier, which would allow the medium tier to expand by
about 500 deg2 , to 2900 deg2 total. While a uniform strategy would simplify analysis, we regard the gains of
spending 80 days on the wide tier — more than doubling the area coverage, and nearly doubling the galaxy
numbers — to be worth the greater complexity.

5

Technical implementation of the Proposed Survey

The Nominal survey consists of several layers. The Medium Tier is most similar to the DRM design and
includes 3 bands of NIR imaging (Y+J+H) as well as grism spectroscopy. The Wide Tier is an extension of
the imaging in H band (at the same exposure time) only to provide space-resolution NIR imaging and weak
lensing shapes over a larger area. The Deep Tier observations are carried out in 2 equatorial calibration fields
(COSMOS and XMM-LSS): these are selected to be LSST deep drilling fields, as well as accessible from
Subaru and other northern observatories, and have additional filters (spanning Z through K) as well as deeper
Y+J+H+Grism coverage. A subset of the COSMOS area forms an Ultra Deep Tier, needed for calibrating
blending effects in weak lensing investigations.
The scripts used to generate the coverage maps and tilings in this section can be found at
https://github.com/hirata10/RomanHLWASTools/tree/v0.1.

5.1

Tiling

In the imaging filters, the sky is tiled in two passes, with 3 dither positions (after each observation, the field
of view is moved “up” (WFI +Y direction, see Fig. 7) by ≈ 1/3 of a field, and dithered diagonally to move
the chip gaps). [The ≈ 1/3 field step is a change from the original Reference strategy, which did 3 small
dithers followed by a full field step. This was done to provide a more uniform survey since the “bottom”
row of SCAs has higher read noise than the others.] This leads to a set of “strips” along the sky, which can

21

Figure 6: Multiplicative bias in shear calibration caused by the difference in PSF shape between stars and
galaxies across the filter band, for W146 (top) and H158 (bottom). Black curves show the uncorrected
bias for galaxies at different redshifts. Colored curves show the bias after mitigation strategies that correct
based on average galaxy SEDs in redshift bins. Dark gray bands show the systematic error budget for shape
measurements from the SRD, and light gray bands show a relaxed requirement that may be adequate if the
shear measurement bias can be calibrated internally from the data, e.g., using the scaling of WL amplitude
with redshift. (Image Credit: HLIS PIT, F. Berlfein & R. Mandelbaum.)

22

Figure 7: Schematic of the “strip” concept used in the sky tiling within each pass. The first panel indicates
the Wide Field Instrument coordinate system and chip numbering; the +Y direction is “up”.
then be horizontally joined to cover a patch of sky. The two passes are rolled 167◦ relative to each other:
being approximately 180◦ apart allows the second pass to be scheduled 4–6 months later (when the Sun is in
the opposite direction relative to the field). The additional 13◦ roll prevents large-scale Moiré patterns from
the two passes, and improves internal calibration by allowing repeat observations of objects across any pair
of SCAs, and will enable de-striping of 1/f noise. It also guarantees that the diffraction spikes from bright
stars are “interlaced”, so that an object impacted by a far diffraction spike in one pass falls in between the
diffraction spikes in the other pass. (There are 12 diffraction spikes, with spacings of alternately ∼ 25◦ and
35◦ .)
The spectroscopic survey uses 4 passes, each paired to give opposite orientations. These have only 2
dither positions in each pass (again stepped by ≈ 1/2 field, and with a small horizontal dither to move the
chip gaps).
The deep fields have a longer imaging exposure time (295 sec), since there is no reason to accept the read
noise and overhead penalties of the Medium/Wide exposure time. Both are near the Ecliptic where the roll
angles available are limited, half of the passes are rolled in a range of angles around the “North is up” direction
and the other half are in a range around the “South is up” orientation. We have confirmed with the HLSS
PIT that this range of available roll angles will be sufficient for the spectroscopic calibration. The nominal
plan is for 5 passes in the standard imaging filters (ZYJHFK); 6 passes in the Wide filter (both to go deeper
and to provide in-flight data on shape and astrometry systematics that could inform future observations); and
36 passes in the grism (but keeping the 190 s exposures). An “ultra-deep” region of 5 deg2 in the COSMOS
field has an additional 10 passes in Y, J, and H, to support blending calibration for the weak lensing analysis.
Examples of medium and deep coverage maps are shown in Figure 8.
The cosmology objectives are agnostic to the precise timing of the deep field observations (although it
is important to get to >2x medium tier depth in these fields as early as possible to test out the pipeline and
identify anything that might need to be adjusted; and we restrict the observations to be >75° from the Sun,
with a preference for farther). However, the timing of the deep field observations will have a significant
impact on their usability for Solar System investigations. (The COSMOS field in particular is only 9° from
the Ecliptic.) The preference is for at least 2 pairs of visits, each 9–24 hours apart, with a spacing of order
∼ 1 month. Given the typically ≈ 9 hours required to do a pass over a Deep Field, and the plan for a total
of 6 passes in the Wide filter and 20 in the standard-width Z/Y/J/H filters (which are ∼ 0.6 mag shallower),
23

Figure 8: Examples of coverage maps from a tiling simulation. Left: an example from the medium tier
imaging, showing the two rolled passes. Middle: an example from the medium tier spectroscopy, with two
pairs of opposite rolls; this has been zoomed out to show the dislocations due to curved sky tiling effects.
Right: the COSMOS deep field (in this case note that the deep observations are 2.8x longer than the wide
observations, so the deep tier is deeper than the observation count would suggest). The survey edge effects
are visible in this case.
there are many internally consistent solutions for such strategies.
Roman will be uniquely sensitive to more distant solar system objects, which are particularly challenging
from the ground due to their slower rates of motion. With two visits approximately 10 hours apart, objects
at 565 au would move 1 pixel and objects at 120 au would move approximately 10 pixels. An ideal cadence
would be to acquire two passes with a 9–24 hour separation and 4–6 weeks later acquire a second pair
separated by 9–24 hours. A third pair acquired 4–8 weeks later (including only the Wide filter in the second
set) could be successfully linked to previous detections. (Over 4 weeks, an object at 565 au will move
approximately 7 arcseconds and at 120 au will move 1.2 arcminutes, so the shear off the pointings over 8–12
weeks will not be significant.) Note that the detection rate limit will likely be set by the closest time separation
of two sets. The discovery detection limit will be set by the Wide filter, but brighter objects will be detected
in multiple bands.

5.2

Footprint Locations

The selected footprint locations are a compromise among several competing considerations. Critical to the
HLWAS are to be (i) far away from the Galactic plane to minimize dust and crowding; and (ii) have optical
band coverage from LSST. Another set of considerations, pushing in opposite directions, are (i) being far
from the Ecliptic (where the sky brightness is greatest, especially for the Medium tier); and (ii) accessibility
from Northern Hemisphere facilities, e.g., at Mauna Kea and Kitt Peak (this is critical for the deep calibration
fields, but for the medium/wide tiers partial coverage is acceptable). A third set of considerations include
overlap with other existing/planned extragalactic deep fields and wide surveys.
This section describes the notional In-Guide footprint that the committee considered, which meets the
critical considerations while achieving compromises on the others. The survey footprint is displayed in Figure 9, and the histograms of its properties are displayed in Figure 10. The distribution of optimal scheduling
windows for this footprint is displayed in Figure 11.
Most of the Wide tier ends up near the Ecliptic, because the regions visible from LSST and Northern
Hemisphere facilities and far from the Ecliptic and Galactic planes are limited, and these regions were priori24

Figure 9: The proposed locations of the HLWAS footprint in Equatorial Cylindrical Equal Area projection.
The Medium tier (Yellow) and Wide tier (Red) are shown, superposed on the SFD dust map (the Galactic
Plane is visible in purple). The Deep calibration fields COSMOS and XMM-LSS are filled in dark gray.
Several other LSST and Euclid deep southern fields (outlined) are included in the Medium tier.

Figure 10: The distribution of survey properties in the proposed Medium and Deep tiers.

25

Table 6: The areas in the Medium and Wide tiers (in deg2 ) satisfying each of the properties considered or
overlap with the indicated surveys. We note that Euclid refers to the currently planned Euclid survey, subject
to revisions, while Euclid-RoI quotes the largest overlap possible in future revisions.

26

Figure 11: The distribution of times throughout the year requested in the in-guide survey, taking into account
Sun angle, roll, and zodiacal brightness constraints (observations at lower ecliptic latitude need to be scheduled farther from the Sun). The left panel shows the fraction of the mission time used by each survey tier if the
observations are scheduled at the center of the scheduling window. (This is out of the total of 5x365.25/36
= 50.7 days in each 1/3 month bin.) The middle panel shows the total request from all 3 tiers. The right
panel shows a 2D histogram of the observations as a function of the center of the scheduling window and the
duration. While some observations have quite strict scheduling requirements (mostly lower ecliptic latitude
observations that are to be scheduled between 115 and 126° from the Sun), others — including the periods in
late April and late August where there are potential collisions with the Galactic Bulge survey — have more
flexibility.
tized for the Medium tier. The impact of zodiacal light is less for the imaging than for the spectroscopy (both
because of read noise/overheads, and also because many imaging science cases scale less strongly with depth
than the emission line galaxy luminosity function).
The great majority of the footprint (87%) is at low reddening, E(B − V ) < 0.05 (Schlegel et al., 1998),
and almost all (99.6%) is at E(B − V ) < 0.1. It is not practical to truly avoid all regions of higher reddening
due to the filamentary structure of the Galactic dust.

5.3

Underguide and Overguide Recommendations

After considering a number of possibilities, we have concluded that in the underguide or overguide scenario,
we would adjust the area of the wide tier while leaving the deep tier and medium tier unchanged. The survey
speed in the wide tier is 33.94 deg2 /day, so the underguide allocation of 480 days would decrease the wide
tier area by 33.94 × 40 = 1358 deg2 , while the overguide allocation of 540 days would increase the wide tier
area by 33.94 × 20 = 679 deg2 . In the underguide scenario, the area of the wide tier would be 1344 deg2 , and
the total area of the medium+wide tiers would be 3759 deg2 . In the overguide scenario, the wide tier would
be 3381 deg2 , and medium+wide would be 5796 deg2 .
We adopted this approach to the underguide and overguide scenarios for several reasons. First and foremost, we regard the deep and medium tiers as the “core mission” of the HLWAS, providing detailed data for
many science investigations, tight control of weak lensing systematics, and spectroscopy as well as imaging;
the wide tier exploits the opportunity afforded by efficient survey strategies and telescope performance to
gain sky coverage and statistical power for cosmology. Second, the constraining power of the spectroscopic
survey is already slightly reduced relative to the DRM, and we do not wish to reduce it further. Third, we
hope that the wide tier will eventually be expanded to larger area in an extended mission, in which case the
underguide/overguide scenarios amount to a trade between prime and extended mission time. We think it
27

less likely (though not impossible) that an extended mission would be used to expand the more expensive,
YJH+grism observations of the medium tier.
For most science cases, the return from the wide tier varies smoothly with survey area. However, with
a 480-day allocation the “wide tier” is substantially smaller in area than the medium tier, so its stand-alone
value for most applications is limited. We strongly advocate keeping the wide tier at least the same area
as the medium tier, which requires a minimum allocation of 510 days; even this mild underguide moves
the total survey area below the symbolic threshold of 5000 deg2 . Conversely, the overguide scenario moves
the wide tier alone above the symbolic threshold of 3000 deg2 and makes the total number of galaxy shape
measurements nearly equal in the two tiers. Thus, the overguide tells a significantly nicer story.
We reiterate that the wide tier substantially expands the opportunities for synergy with other surveys
including LSST, eROSITA, and CMB experiments in the southern hemisphere. Our placement of the wide
tier fields balances considerations of accessibility to northern hemisphere telescopes against overlap with
southern hemisphere surveys. Changes of a few hundred deg2 in the wide tier can change the available overlap
with those surveys (see Table 6) by a large factor. In particular, the overguide would significantly increase
the overlap with the surveys conducted by the South Pole Telescope (SPT), most notably the 1500 deg2 SPT3G-Main survey (the overlap with SPT-3G-Main increases from 22 deg2 in the in-guide plan — basically a
triangle around the ELAIS field5 — up to 473 deg2 in the overguide), which is likely to remain the deepest
wide-area CMB survey over the duration of the Roman mission. Overlap with CMB experiments enables a
number of scientific studies, from cosmology with cluster counts, to CMB × lensing cross-correlation studies,
baryonic feedback studies, and more. The SPT fields are well characterized, and in particular, the SPT cluster
count cosmology with weak-lensing mass calibration is in a mature state. Expanding overlap with SPT is one
of the most valuable opportunities in the overguide scenario.
We will provide a detailed footprint choice for the underguide or overguide scenario (or an intermediate
case) if the ROTAC chooses to recommend one or the other. The wide tier includes area in the northern and
southern Galactic caps. In the underguide scenario, we would take area from both of these regions, as each of
them has distinct value (accessibility to northern hemisphere telescopes vs. overlap with southern hemisphere
surveys). In the overguide scenario, we would add area to the southern cap region, since the northern cap
footprint already covers most of the area that has both low extinction and LSST coverage.

6

Constraints and Considerations

The principal cosmology goals of the HLWAS could be met by many variants of the field selection and are
relatively insensitive to scheduling details. However, there are some constraints and considerations that will
affect the detailed design and scheduling of the survey. We summarize these in this section.
Scheduling constraints: While there are no hard constraints on the ordering of observations, there are orderings that are preferable for operational reasons, to enhance particular science cases, or to ensure some science
analyses are possible earlier in the mission:
• Early deep fields: At least 2 passes in each filter (ZYJHFKW), and at least 8 passes in the grism (4
leading and 4 trailing), should be accomplished very early in the mission to confirm that the survey
strategy and data reduction work as expected and inform any adjustments necessary. This should be
prior to the start of the other surveys for the highest-priority data (Y, J, and H band passes, and 4 of the
grism passes, either those dispersed North or those dispersed South depending on field availability);
and within the first year of the mission for the remainder.
• Ultra Deep Tier: The Ultra Deep layer is needed for downstream shear analysis, and we recommend
reaching at least half the depth in the first 2 years of the mission.
• Medium and Wide tiers: There is a preference to schedule Medium tier observations mostly — but
not entirely — before the Wide tier when possible, because we have the greatest confidence in our
5 The

SPT-3G-Main footprint does not extend far enough East to cover the Euclid Deep Field South.

28

understanding of systematic effects in the Medium tier and plan to use this to inform the analysis of
the Wide tier. Within the Medium tier, the preference is to obtain at least 1 pass of imaging data in Y,
J, and H prior to the grism passes (although the acquisition of the grism data does not depend on the
imaging data, the grism spectra cannot be processed and scientifically utilized until the imaging data
are available). The request is not to schedule all of the Medium tier first and then the Wide tier because
of the need for interlacing (see below).
• Interlacing: The cross-calibration of the Northern and Southern Galactic caps has been a challenge in
previous large-scale structure surveys. There are seasons where both are accessible from L2 (e.g., in
December the Northern Galactic cap region is visible in the “leading” direction in Earth’s orbit, while
the Southern Galactic cap region is visible in the “trailing” direction). We recommend that during these
periods observations in the two caps are interlaced (e.g., a few days of one and then a few days of the
other) so that slow zero-point drifts can be distinguished from true offsets in the photometry in the two
caps. Similarly, some strips of Wide survey should be interlaced with Medium. This internal calibration
is in addition to (but does not replace) the planned tracking of zero-points via the Touchstone fields.
• Solar system object searches: There is a preference to schedule the COSMOS field observations in
pairs of passes 9–24 hours apart, with a second pair 4–6 weeks later (see Section 5.1). While the Wide
filter is optimal for detection, additional epochs may be obtained in the other filters.
Location of specific fields: The Medium/Wide survey footprint was chosen by the committee on the basis
of overlap with other facilities, sky brightness, and Galactic foregrounds. Modest changes to the footprint
(e.g., moving the edges a few degrees here and there) would be acceptable, provided that the Deep fields
are still included. We also deliberately included the other LSST Deep drilling fields (CDFS and ELAIS)
and the Euclid Deep Field-South in the Medium footprint; while they are not Roman HLWAS deep fields,
many synergies are possible with the Roman Medium data, and we want to enable tying these fields to the
Medium survey if they are covered in the GAS program (as seems likely given the interest from the white
papers). Since the Roman HLWAS footprint will likely factor into observing proposals on other facilities, it
is important that once we have iterated with the scheduling group and converged to a final footprint, that this
choice be publicly communicated and that there be a high bar for any further modifications.
The Deep tier choices of COSMOS and XMM-LSS are the only fields with both LSST deep drilling
and good accessibility from Northern Hemisphere facilities. The committee does not see any reasonable
alternatives to these fields.
The relative roll angles of the passes interact with scheduling due to the orientation constraint relative to
the Sun (instantaneously ±15◦ , but except for fields on the Ecliptic the direction to the Sun varies slowly).
The imaging passes were arranged with a 167◦ relative roll to provide for internal calibration and move the
diffraction spikes; but varying this ±5◦ either way would also satisfy these needs. It is also possible to
flip an imaging pass upside-down (so 13◦ relative roll) instead (e.g., two “leading season” or two “trailing
season” passes instead of one of each), although with the asymmetric nature of the Roman field of view one
needs to be careful about efficiency losses at the edges if this is done often. For the grism, the balance of 2
leading season and 2 trailing season passes, with nearly opposed dispersion direction, is important to break
the degeneracy between the location of the centroid of the line-emitting region and the wavelength (hence
redshift) of the source galaxy.
Sensitivity to start and end of science operations: Because the HLWAS survey constraints repeat every
year, the principal impact would be from which month of the year science operations begin. In particular, the
early deep field that one would observe changes depending on when in the year we are ready to observe it:
COSMOS is best positioned in late April–May or November/December; and XMM-LSS is best positioned
in January or August. The spacing of the two deep fields guarantees that at least one could be covered in the
first ∼4 months of science operations.
Ancillary data: The principal ancillary data sets required from other observatories are optical photometry
(from LSST) and calibration spectroscopy in the deep fields (which will include a substantial contribution
29

from Subaru/PFS). Other overlapping large-area surveys (including those with multiwavelength data ranging
from radio to X-ray wavelengths) will enhance the HLWAS science, and we have taken these into account in
our footprint design.
We note that the HLIS PIT request for blending calibration fields included two ultra-deep fields of 5 deg2
each, requiring 6.4 days each to provide the extra depth beyond the Deep tier. The proposed tiling includes one
5 deg2 field, centered at COSMOS. The southern HLTDS field, if it follows previous notional plans (Akeson
et al., 2019), would provide a second field (it does not need to coincide with an HLWAS deep field or be
accessible from Northern spectroscopic instruments for blending calibration). If the selected implementation
of the HLTDS does not provide YJH coverage meeting this need for the second field, then consideration
should be given to adding a second ultra deep field in the HLWAS, with a corresponding reduction in the time
allocated to the wider areas.
Pre-survey requirements: In addition to “standard” commissioning activities (e.g., validating throughput
and overhead models), the early Deep field observations are needed to validate the survey depths and galaxy
yields before committing to the full wide-area survey. Note that the requested Deep field observations for this
purpose are only a subset of the total Deep field observations in the HLWAS.

7

Technical checkpoints from early survey data analysis

The most stringent performance requirements for the HLWAS derive from cosmology mission goals. The
Medium and Wide tiers cover large areas to provide statistical power for cosmology and general astrophysics,
while the Deep tier is used to calibrate the Medium and Wide tier measurements, and measure faint objects
with many-band photometry and grism spectroscopy. The Medium tier most closely resembles the original
DRM, designed to provide the highest level of systematics control of contemporary major weak lensing
projects (Euclid, LSST, Roman), and optimized for a high FoM in terms of σ8 (see Section 3.1). The Wide
tier is complementary, being optimized to cover the largest possible area for general astrophysics, while still
maintaining sufficient control of systematic uncertainties to support weak lensing shear measurements for a
broad range of cosmological goals which scale mostly with survey area (e.g., dark energy; Eifler et al., 2021,
2024).
Accordingly, on-orbit characterization of delivered data quality and calibration methods, including combinations of Roman data with LSST for photo-z estimation, will be important to validate both the Medium
and Wide tier designs. Furthermore, the Wide tier is envisioned as an initial investment towards even largerarea surveys that could be pursued with GAS programs and/or in an extended mission, and the design should
also be evaluated in this context.
In Section 6, we recommend that the HLWAS begin with an initial set of Deep tier observations, in
part, to enable early validation of the Medium and Wide tier designs. The longer exposure times, larger
number of dithered pointings, broader multi-band coverage, and overlap with external datasets for the Deep
tier will provide direct, high signal-to-noise, on-orbit measurements of the flux distribution of galaxies in
the Roman passbands, and allow tests to calibrate images, perform source measurements, and extract spectra
for fainter objects than the limiting sensitivity of the Medium and Wide tiers. The committee recommends
that the Medium and Wide tiers use the same exposure time and tiling pattern to provide uniform H-band
coverage over the full HLWAS footprint. The early Deep tier observations should be used to validate the
Deep, Medium, and Wide tier strategy as a comprehensive survey program, in particular, considering that
cosmology analyses will likely combine measurements from the three tiers.
We further recommend that the Medium tier observations be (mostly) scheduled before the Wide tier
observations to provide an additional layer of survey strategy validation and potential re-optimization. The
subset of Medium tier H-band observations are effectively a pilot for the Wide tier since the two tiers use
an identical tiling pattern. Thus, the Medium tier observations can be used to directly evaluate the Wide tier
design, and compare object measurements for the single H band versus JHY combination.
We emphasize that re-optimization of the survey strategy after launch should have a high bar, driven by
substantially new technical understanding that emerges from on-orbit characterization, that would substan30

tially impact the broad science portfolio of the Roman mission. For reasons discussed below, most of the
survey strategy re-optimization options are more likely to be relevant for the Wide rather than the Medium
tier. Critical technical parameters that could potentially impact the Medium and Wide tier survey strategy
include:
• SNR limit and effective number density for weak lensing source galaxies. The recommended design is based on a SNR>18 cut for weak-lensing galaxies. The Deep tier data should be utilized to
verify this limit.
– If a higher SNR limit is found to be necessary, the exposure time for the Medium / Wide tier
might need to be increased, leading to a reduction of the survey area.
– If a lower SNR limit is deemed acceptable, the exposure time could be decreased in order to
capture more area.
• PSF modeling and weak lensing shear measurement. Deep tier observations should be used to verify
that the planned number of dithers, passes, and roll angle combinations for the Medium and Wide tiers
enable the required precision for shear estimates.
– If the recommended tiling pattern is found to be insufficient for weak lensing shear measurement,
the Medium and Wide tier survey areas could be reduced to ensure adequate sampling.
• Shear measurements in the H-band / W-band. As discussed in Section 4.5, the multiplicative shear
bias in the W band is expected to be too large for robust weak lensing measurements due to chromatic
PSF effects; this concern is a major driver of the motivation to conduct the Wide tier observations in Hband instead of W-band. At the same time, some cosmology goals of the Wide tier have less stringent
requirements on the multiplicative shear bias than the SRD. Since shear estimation methods constantly
evolve, the initial Deep tier data should be used to re-evaluate whether the Wide tier could be conducted
in the W-band instead of the H-band, in order to yield a substantially higher number density of weaklensing source galaxies. Potentially relevant will be the lessons learned from the Euclid mission, which
relies on its wide VIS band data to measure shapes. Euclid applies mitigation techniques informed by
data periodically obtained at a set of calibration fields and strongly relies on additional photometric
information from ground.
– If the multiplicative bias for W-band can be calibrated to a sub-dominant level for cosmology inference, and W + LSST provides sufficient photo-z information (in combination with the Medium
and Deep tiers for calibration), could consider using W-band for the Wide tier. An implication of
that scenario is that the uniformity of Medium and Wide tier in the recommended survey strategy
would be altered. Other science cases that rely on more precise near-IR color information might
be impacted.
• Photometric redshift estimation and ensemble redshift distribution calibration. The recommended
design uses JHY for the Medium tier and H for the Wide tier. Grism spectroscopy requires at least two
imaging bands, and therefore covers only the Medium tier. Although Y is shallower than JH, the
current understanding of photo-z’s indicates significantly improved performance when Y is included.
The Wide tier strategy assumes that H+LSST photo-z’s can be sufficiently calibrated from the Deep
and Medium tier imaging (e.g., through Self-Organizing Maps). As more datasets come online (e.g.,
spectroscopic calibration samples, LSST and Euclid photometry), the photo-z performance should be
evaluated on the Deep fields.
– If H + LSST alone is found to be insufficient for photo-z estimation at the level needed to support
cosmology goals with the Wide tier, consider the JH imaging combination for the Wide tier over
a reduced area. If JHY + LSST is found to be required for robust photo-z estimation, consider
omitting the Wide tier and expand the area of the Medium tier, including both JHY imaging and
grism spectroscopy.
31

• Exposure time for grism spectroscopy. Use the Deep tier observations to verify that the recommended
spectroscopic strategy returns the required redshift success rate.
– If the grism spectroscopy exposure time needs to be increased to achieve the required redshift
success rate, could reduce the Wide tier area to ensure adequate exposure time while maintaining
the recommended area coverage of the Medium tier.
– If the grism spectroscopy exposure time could be reduced while maintaining the required redshift
success rate, consider increasing the area of the Medium tier; this option should be considered
together with the evaluation of photo-z estimation (see above).
• Wide Tier Survey Footprint
– Wide tier footprint could be re-optimized to account for refined understanding of backgrounds,
overlap with other datasets.
In brief, we recommend that on-orbit performance evaluation inform the final Medium and Wide tier
survey strategies to ensure that both tiers can be used for robust weak lensing measurement, while seeking to
cover the widest possible area.
In all the scenarios considered, we recommend that grism spectroscopy cover the full Medium tier footprint, and to maintain a similar 2:1 ratio of total imaging and spectroscopy time across the Medium + Wide
tiers.
Beyond the technical considerations above, the committee anticipates that the scientific landscape could
evolve between now and the early phase of the Roman mission, considering the ensemble of astronomical
surveys that are anticipated in the coming years. Combinations of Roman data with other datasets, and/or
major new scientific insights, might provide new opportunities to optimize the HLWAS strategy. In nearly all
scenarios considered by the committee, the Medium tier remains a central part of fulfilling the core Roman
cosmology mission goals. Accordingly, there is a high threshold to consider modifications to the Medium
tier. A Wide tier scheduled mainly in the latter half of the Roman mission would leave open the possibility
to re-optimize the design based on on-orbit characterization and emergent scientific opportunities that could
not be considered during the current Core Community Survey definition process.

8

Survey extensions

The white papers described science investigations ranging from the solar system to the distant universe. Many
of these investigations will be naturally enabled by our proposed HLWAS design, with some that benefit most
from the deep tier, others from the medium tier, and others from the full area of medium+wide. Other
investigations require additional data, e.g., other bands, specific targets, greater depth, or specific observing
cadence. Many of these investigations are naturally suited to GAS programs and/or to surveys that could be
executed in an extended mission. We note that ∼ 40 Msec are expected to be available for GAS proposals
during the 5-year prime mission, so many distinct surveys at the few Msec level are feasible.
Several white papers articulated the value of imaging in K213, the reddest of the Roman bands. The
recommended deep tier will include 19.2 deg2 of K213 imaging, to a 5σ point-source depth of 25.9. GAS
programs might well pursue K213 imaging over larger areas. Because of thermal background, reaching a
given mAB limit requires much longer exposures in K213 than in Y, J, or H, so the optimal tradeoff between
area and depth may be quite different for K213 imaging, depending on the priorities of the science case. Thus,
a strategy for K213 imaging is best framed in the context of a GAS program with specified science objectives,
building on the lessons learned from the HLWAS deep tier. We can also imagine GAS programs that would
add R062 imaging to a portion of the medium tier to get optical coverage at Roman spatial resolution, or a
GAS program that would obtain W146 imaging in areas not covered by the HLWAS.
Nearby galaxies are important targets because Roman imaging can resolve individual bright stars within
them. For example, imaging at the H-band depth of the HLWAS medium and wide tiers can detect TRGB
32

stars (HAB ≈ −4.5) to a distance of ∼ 10 Mpc and red clump stars (HAB ≈ 0) to slightly beyond 1 Mpc,
in the absence of crowding. The HLWAS area will encompass some nearby galaxies, including the Sculptor
group at D ∼ 4 Mpc, but a targeted survey of all galaxies with D < 10 − 15 Mpc would be a natural GAS
program. At somewhat larger distances, surface brightness fluctuations remain a useful distance indicator
and probe of stellar populations, even when individual stars can no longer be resolved. The Virgo and Coma
clusters are important targets for understanding the influence of the cluster environment on galaxy properties.
While the HLWAS will allow a useful start on nearby galaxy science, the optimal combinations of depth and
bands for such surveys will likely differ from the HLWAS choices, and they will depend on galaxy distance.
The HLWAS will span a wide range of Galactic latitude and longitude, and in combination with the
Galactic bulge and Galactic plane surveys it will enable studies of Milky Way stellar populations from the
heart of the bulge to the outer reaches of the stellar halo. Nonetheless, within the Galaxy, location matters. It
may prove valuable to complement the community surveys with GAS programs that cover different regions
of the sky or obtain second epochs of HLWAS areas for proper motion measurements. Location also matters
for solar system studies, and here the details of observing cadence are crucial to the discovery potential. The
HLWAS deep tier observations, especially in the W146 band, will provide a new census of small bodies in the
distant solar system, and it will be valuable for designing GAS surveys focused on solar system applications.
Another extension of the HLWAS could come in future spectroscopic campaigns. As discussed in Section
4.2, the cosmological FoMs for BAOs and RS Ds would be improved with additional area; if analysis of the
HLWAS data shows that spectral decontamination can be reliably achieved with imaging in a single Roman
filter, then parts of the wide-tier H-band only area could be followed up with further grism spectroscopy.
If multiple Roman bands are required, this additional area could be associated with imaging in a second
filter. Coverage of a wider area with additional spectroscopy and (potentially) multi-band imaging would
have uses for a range of other wide-field science. There is also the potential in the future to make the HLWAS
spectroscopy in the Medium and Deep fields deeper, with follow-up grism observations that could be coadded to the HLWAS spectroscopic data. The cosmological case for expanding the spectroscopic survey
would be especially strong if future observations provide compelling evidence for evolving dark energy, as
Roman is uniquely powerful at densely mapping the z > 1 universe with emission line galaxies.
As already emphasized in Section 4.4, we hope that the wide tier of the HLWAS will be the starting
point for much larger area H-band surveys in an extended mission that provide Roman-resolution imaging
over much of the sky. The science case for additional areas may prove strong enough that some of them are
proposed for GAS programs within the prime mission. In a unit that is useful for considering such programs,
we note that the survey speed of the wide tier is about 390 deg2 per Msec. At the 107 sec exposure time of
the wide tier, the overhead penalty of the HLWAS observing strategy is about 15%. This rises to a factor of
1.8 for texp = 33 sec (see Figure 1), but for some GAS science cases that require less depth than the HLWAS,
that overhead penalty may be worth paying in order to gain survey area. [For example, at texp = 33 sec,
the survey speed would be roughly 390 × (107/33) × (1.15/1.8) = 808 deg2 per Msec.] For cases that
do not require the high accuracy shape measurements of weak lensing, faster sampling strategies, e.g., one
pass with four dither positions instead of two passes with three dither positions, may also allow a better area
vs. depth optimization. For an extended mission, one might also want to reconsider the decision to do wide
tier observations in H-band rather than W146, either because there are convincing demonstrations that shape
measurement and photo-z systematics are not limiting factors for weak lensing analysis with LSST+W146,
or because weak lensing is a lower science priority by the time of the extended mission.

A

White Paper Evaluation Questions

For reference, we include the list of questions the committee considered when discussing the White Papers
and their requests for survey design:
• What are the key science goals?
• How impactful are these science goals?
33

• How central are the unique capabilities of Roman to achieving these goals?
• Does this program require coordination with other observatories or surveys, and if so how?
• How does this science program benefit from depth vs. area vs. number of bands?
• If specifying changes to the DRM:
– Relative to the DRM, what changes would be needed to accomplish the goals of this science
program?
– What bands (counting grism as a “band”) does this science program need? What depth does it
need?
• To the extent that it requires an augmentation relative to the DRM (in additional bands or additional
epochs) what area/depth is needed?
– Could this augmentation be achieved in a GO program (a reasonable limit is simtwo weeks or
∼1 Msec?)

– Does this augmentation necessarily (within reasonable observing time limits) require eliminating
some observations from the DRM?

B

HLWASDC requests to PITs and PIT reports

The HLWASDC made formal requests to both the HLIS PIT and HLSS PIT in September 2024, with reports
presented to the committee via presentations in October 2024.

B.1

HLIS PIT request

Please prepare a concise report (in the form of slides and a 30-minute presentation to the HLWAS CCS
Committee) that includes/addresses the following:
1. For dither/pass strategies that enable recovery of fully sampled shape information, over a wide range
of possible exposure times, in the Y, J, H, F184, F213, and F146 filters:
(a) Depth for point sources and rexp=0.3 arcsec extended sources
(b) Area covered per 100 days
(c) Number of effective shape measurements per 100 days
(d) Estimated median redshift
(e) Estimated number of galaxies detected at ¿ 5σ
2. For single-band, 2-band, 3-band, and 4-band strategies, with a range of exposure times and dither/pass
strategies, the WL FoM (as defined in the requirements document) attained per 100 days of observation.
If there are reasons that the FoM will not scale linearly with the total observing time, explain these
reasons.
3. For the single-band case (assumed for the wide tier), estimate the improvement in the WL FoM from
including CMB lensing data.
4. An explanation of the statistical and systematic implications of doing wide-tier imaging in F146.
5. A narrative assessment of the impact of different band choices (e.g., YJHF184, YJH only, JH only, H
only, F146 only) on photo-z accuracy and associated systematics, assuming optical imaging available
from LSST and/or Subaru HSC.
34

6. Comment on the relative advantages for HLSS cosmology of high Ecliptic latitude fields (which have
the darker sky, but would be accessible from only the Southern hemisphere if they overlap with LSST),
versus low Ecliptic latitude fields that would be accessible from both hemispheres.
7. A narrative summary of what is required from the deep-tier observations to enable adequate calibration
and systematics tests for WL cosmology, including depth, area, and bands.
8. Comments on what external calibration data (e.g., spectroscopic redshifts) will be needed to achieve
the WL cosmology goals.
9. Assuming (just as a representative, fixed number) 300 days of imaging observations allocated to
medium and wide tiers (i.e., not including deep tier observations), what is the PIT’s recommended
strategy from the perspective of WL cosmology? In particular, what is the recommended division of
time between medium and wide tiers, and what is the recommended exposure time and dither/pass
strategy within these tiers? Describe how systematics control and statistical power are factored into
this recommendation.
10. A brief narrative of how anticipated WL cosmology constraints from Roman will fit in the context of
anticipated constraints from LSST and Euclid, including issues of statistical power, systematic uncertainties, timing, and complementarity.

B.2

HLSS PIT request

Please prepare a concise report (in the form of slides and a 30-minute presentation to the HLWAS CCS
Committee) that includes/addresses the following:
1. For pass/roll-angle strategies that enable acceptably uncontaminated redshift measurements, over a
wide range of possible exposure times
(a) Line flux limits for a realistic extended source at 1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 1.8, 1.9 mu.
(b) Area covered per 100 days of spectroscopic observing.
(c) Number of z=1-2 redshifts and number of z=2-3 redshifts per 100 days.
(d) Comoving space density of galaxies with secure redshifts at z = 1.2, 1.5, 1.8, 2.2, 2.5.
(e) How does the contamination rate vary as a function of exposure time/passes/roll-angles/imaging
bands? What is the maximum contamination rate that could be effectively corrected?
2. For a range of exposure times, the BAO FoM and RSD FoM (as defined in the requirements document)
attained per 100 days of spectroscopic observation.
If there are reasons that the FoM will not scale linearly with the total observing time, explain these
reasons.
3. What is the minimum Roman imaging data needed to support the spectroscopic survey, e.g., which
bands and to what depth? Are multiple roll angles required for the imaging data, or would a single pass
with dithering that allows fully sampled images be sufficient? What is the desirable Roman imaging
data to support the spectroscopic survey, and how does it improve the redshift survey performance
relative to the minimum data? (Recognizing that more bands or greater depth will likely come at the
cost of area.)
4. Comment on the relative advantages for HLSS cosmology of high Ecliptic latitude fields (which have
the darker sky, but would be accessible from only the Southern hemisphere if they overlap with LSST),
versus low Ecliptic latitude fields that would be accessible from both hemispheres.

35

5. A narrative summary of what is required from the deep-tier observations to enable adequate calibration
and systematics tests for the galaxy redshift survey.
6. Comments on what external (non-Roman) calibration data will be needed to achieve the redshift survey’s cosmology goals.
7. Assuming (just as a representative, fixed number) 150 days of wide-area spectroscopic observations
(i.e., not including the deep tier), what is the PIT’s recommended survey strategy from the perspective
of redshift survey cosmology? Should the spectroscopic survey adopt a uniform exposure time or have
medium and wide tiers with different exposure times and/or observing strategies? What should the
exposure time or times be? Describe how systematics control and statistical power are factored into
this recommendation.
8. A brief narrative of how anticipated redshift survey cosmology constraints from Roman will fit in
the context of anticipated constraints from DESI and Euclid, including issues of statistical power,
systematic uncertainties, timing, and complementarity.

B.3

PIT reports

Materials from the PIT reports are available on the HLWASDC Confluence Page. Once this report is made
available to the public, these materials can be placed at a website that is widely accessible.

References
Akeson, R., Armus, L., Bachelet, E., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1902.05569
Brammer, G. B., van Dokkum, P. G., Franx, M., et al. 2012, , 200, 13
DESI Collaboration, Aghamousa, A., Aguilar, J., et al. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1611.00036
Digman, M. C., McEwen, J. E., & Hirata, C. M. 2019, , 2019, 004
Eifler, T., Simet, M., Krause, E., et al. 2021, , 507, 1514
Eifler, T., Fang, X., Krause, E., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2411.04088
Euclid Collaboration: Mellier, Y., Abdurro’uf, Acevedo Barroso, J., et al. 2024, , accepted, arXiv:2405.13491
Grogin, N. A., Kocevski, D. D., Faber, S. M., et al. 2011, , 197, 35
Hirata, C. M., Yamamoto, M., Laliotis, K., et al. 2024, , 528, 2533
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, , 873, 111
Koekemoer, A. M., Faber, S. M., Ferguson, H. C., et al. 2011, , 197, 36
Merloni, A., Lamer, G., Liu, T., et al. 2024, , 682, A34
National Research Council. 2010, New Worlds, New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics (Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press), doi:10.17226/12951
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, , 500, 525
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1503.03757

36

Tamura, N., Takato, N., Shimono, A., et al. 2016, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI, ed.
C. J. Evans, L. Simard, & H. Takami, 99081M
Thompson, R. I., Illingworth, G., Bouwens, R., et al. 2005, , 130, 1
To, C.-H., DeRose, J., Wechsler, R. H., et al. 2024, , 961, 59
Wang, Y., Zhai, Z., Alavi, A., et al. 2022, , 928, 1

37

– 68 –
C.2.

High Latitude Time Domain Survey

Findings of the Roman High-Latitude Time-Domain
Survey Definition Committee
S. Bradley Cenko1 , Masao Sako2 (Co-Chairs), Susan Benecchi3 ,
Alessandra Corsi4 , Michael Fausnaugh5 , Sebastian Gomez6 ,
Rebekah Hounsell7 , Takashi Moriya8 , Rosemary Pike9 , Gordon
Richards10 , Russell Ryan11 , Schuyler Van Dyk12 , and V. Ashley
Villar13
13 December 2024
The High Latitude Time Domain Survey (HLTDS) is one of three Core
Community Surveys that Roman will carry out during its nominal
5-year mission. The HLTDS Survey Definition Committee was charged
with designing a survey strategy that meets the scientific requirements
related to Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) cosmology while also maximizing
the broader scientific return for the entire Roman community.
Here we describe our recommended implementation of the HLTDS,
which has three components:
• The Core Component (HLTDS-CC): Modeled in many ways after
the Design Reference Survey (Rose et al. 2021), the HLTDS-CC is the
primary source of discovery and characterization for Type Ia SNe
and most other transient/variable source classes. The HLTDS-CC
requires the bulk of the survey time to perform cadenced imaging
and prism spectroscopy over the central two years of the five-year
prime Roman operations.
• The Pilot Component (HLTDS-PC): As the HLTDS-CC does not begin until 1.5 years into Roman operations, our committee felt that
obtaining imaging and prism spectroscopy of our recommended
fields is critical early in the mission lifetime. The HLTDS-PC provides deep, supernova-free reference observations of the HLTDS-CC
fields, as well as an opportunity to test assumptions that drove our
survey design recommendations (e.g., high-z SN Ia rate) and data
analysis pipelines.
• The Extended Component (HLTDS-EC): In addition to SN Ia cosmology, the NIR sensitivity will make Roman a particularly powerful probe of transients in the early Universe. Due both to cosmological time dilation and intrinsic physics, many of these high-z sources
will have long time scales that are difficult to fully capture with the
two-year duration of the HLTDS-CC. We therefore also recommend
a (temporally) extended component to provide access to the longest
time scales possible in the prime Roman mission lifetime.

1

NASA/GSFC
Penn
3
Planetary Science Institute
2

4

JHU
Texas Tech
6
Harvard/University of Texas
5

7

UMBC/NASA/GSFC
NAOJ
9
CfA
10
Drexel
11
STScI
12
Caltech/IPAC
13
Harvard
8

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

Contents
3

Science Motivation

Science Requirements and Figure of Merit

3

White Papers, Science Pitches, and Community Feedback

6

Committee Process

8

Discussion of Results

8

Imaging Implementation
Spectroscopy Implementation
Field Selection

12

16
18

Survey Extensions

23

Technical Implementation
In-Guide Recommendations

23
25

Under-Guide Recommendation

26

Over-Guide Recommendation

27

Constraints and Considerations
Sensitivity to Launch Date
Ancillary Data Sets

27

Slew Requirements

28

27

Technical Checkpoints from Pilot Survey
Conclusions

30

Acknowledgments

30

29

4

2

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

3

Science Motivation
Science Requirements and Figure of Merit
The primary goal of the HLTDS is to use SNe Ia as cosmological
probes to measure the expansion history of the Universe. The light
curves of SNe Ia are powerful “standardizable” candles: measurement of their peak luminosity, evolution time scale, and color can
be used to infer reliable distances to these sources14 . As a result,
SNe Ia offered the first evidence of the accelerating expansion of the
Universe, commonly attributed to dark energy15 .
With its large field-of-view, exceptional sensitivity, and NIR bandpass, Roman will be by far the most efficient discovery machine of
SNe Ia at z > 1. Formally, the requirements for Roman SN Ia cosmology are stated in terms of the Dark Energy Task Force Figure of Merit
(FoM)16 :
FoM ≡ det[C(w0 , wa )],
(1)
where C is the covariance matrix of the equation of state parameters
w0 and wa (Figure 1). When combined with other complementary
cosmological probes (e.g., weak lensing, baryon acoustic oscillations),
the HLTDS requirement is to achieve FoM > 325.

0

14

M. M. Phillips. The Absolute
Magnitudes of Type IA Supernovae.
ApJL, 413:L105, August 1993. doi:
10.1086/186970; and W. D. Kenworthy
et al. SALT3: An Improved Type Ia Supernova Model for Measuring Cosmic
Distances. ApJL, 923(2):265, December
2021. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac30d8

15

Adam G. Riess et al. Observational
Evidence from Supernovae for an Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological
Constant. AJ, 116(3):1009–1038, September 1998. doi: 10.1086/300499; and
S. Perlmutter et al. Measurements of
Ω and Λ from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae. ApJ, 517(2):565–586, June 1999.
doi: 10.1086/307221
16

Andreas Albrecht et al. Report of the
Dark Energy Task Force. arXiv e-prints
(astro-ph/0609591), September 2006;
and Yun Wang. Figure of merit for dark
energy constraints from current observational data. PRD, 77(12):123525, June
2008. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.77.123525

wa

−1

−2

(DESI+SDSS) BAO + CMB + PantheonPlus
(DESI+SDSS) BAO + CMB + Union3
(DESI+SDSS) BAO + CMB + DESY5

−3

−1.0

−0.8

w0

−0.6

−0.4

While the formal mission requirements for the HLTDS were derived entirely from SN Ia cosmology, the HLTDS also offers the
possibility to address a broad range of topics at the forefront of
modern (astro)physics. The recent explosion in monitoring of the

Figure 1: Current constraints on the
equation of state parameters w0 and wa
from combined analysis using multiple
independent cosmological probes
(baryon acoustic oscillations, cosmic
microwave background, and type Ia
SNe). The DETF FoM is inversely
proportional to the area of this error
ellipse. Credit: DESI Collaboration et al.
(2024).

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

time-variable sky – particularly at optical wavelengths – has revealed
entirely (and in some cases unexpected) phenomena, and features
prominently as a community priority in the 2020 Decadal Survey.
NIR observations by Roman are particularly well suited to identify
high-redshift transients, dust-extinguished sources, and cool/red
objects. Furthermore, the NIR transient sky has been less well explored to date17 , offering the opportunity for serendipitous discovery.
Optimizing the broad science return from the HLTDS, while simultaneously achieving the SN Ia cosmology requirements, is the “dual
mandate” at the heart of our committee work18 .

4

17

Largely for technical reasons (e.g.,
large-format detector cost, sky background).
18

Yes, this is a Federal Reserve reference.

White Papers, Science Pitches, and Community Feedback
To ensure that committee considered the broadest range of possible
science in defining the HLTDS, multiple opportunities for community
input were provided.
During the call for White Papers we received a total of 23 papers
related to the HLTDS19 . These papers include recommendations for
several modifications to the Design Reference Mission implementation of the HLTDS20 , with particular focus on optimizations on filter
selection, cadence, depth, survey area, and field choices. Additionally, some recommendations for synergies with other observatories
and Roman surveys were proposed. Lastly, a number of papers advocate for an extended HLTDS that covers a period longer than the
nominal 2 years of the survey.
Most of these modifications are aimed at enchaining the detection,
classification, and characterization of a number of time-variable astrophysical sources, including: Type Ia SNe, superluminous supernovae
(SLSNe), high-redshift SNe, pair-instability SNe (PISNe), tidal disruption events (TDEs), kilonovae (KNe), active galactic nuclei (AGN),
variable stars, and black hole binaries. Some papers also advocate
for the optimization of the survey towards the study of high-redshift
galaxies, resolved stellar populations in nearby galaxies, and low
mass stars in the Milky Way halo.
A majority of papers emphasize the need for careful optimization
of filter selection. The most frequently recommended filters are F158
(H), F184 (F), and F213 (K), with various combinations suggested
to enhance specific science cases. For example, Joshi, Harikane, and
Moriya highlight these filters are necessary to improve measurements
of high-redshift galaxies, stellar mass assembly, and detecting rare
phenomena such as pair-instability supernovae (PISNe), respectively.
Additionally, Kraemer and Holwerda suggest these filters are needed
for accurate distance measurements and characterization of low-mass
stars.

19

See https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/
roman/wps_2023 for a full listing.
20

B. M. Rose et al. A Reference
Survey for Supernova Cosmology with the Nancy Grace Roman
Space Telescope. arXiv e-prints, art.
arXiv:2111.03081, November 2021. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2111.03081

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

Several papers propose adjustments to the cadence of the survey,
aimed towards the detection and characterization of transients with
varying timescales. For instance, Macias and Andreoni advocate
for at least part of the survey to have fast cadences under 4 days
to accommodate rapidly evolving transients. Rose and Fox echo
the need for a staggered or decoupled cadence to better capture
SNe, KNe, and high-redshift events such as SLSNe, TDEs, or PISNe.
Lastly, Rose proposed a one-day cadence for prism spectroscopy to
maximize transient discovery.
Several papers, such as Gomez, Fox, Yamada, and Moriya, suggest
extending the survey duration beyond the nominal 2 years. These
authors argue that longer survey durations, up to 5 years, would
allow for the detection and characterization of rarer and more exotic
events, such as low-luminosity AGN, SNe at very high redshifts (z >
5), PISNe, TDEs, and SLSNe.
In terms of synergies with other observatories, Thilker, Harikane,
and Koyama propose leveraging Roman’s infrared capabilities alongside other telescopes, such as CASTOR and Subaru. These synergies
could enhance studies of galaxy evolution, structure formation, and
reionization. Similarly, Rhoads and Haiman emphasize the importance of overlapping the HLTDS with the Roman HLWAS to improve
studies of AGN variability and black hole seed evolution.
Lastly, a number of papers touch on the subject of field selection.
Rose and Aldering emphasize the importance of choosing fields
with low zodiacal background to maximize sensitivity and improve
data quality, particularly for transient and supernova cosmology
studies. The recommendation to focus on fields in the Continuous
Viewing Zone (CVZ), such as the Euclid Deep Field South or the
Extended Groth Strip, ensures that these fields are observed with
high frequency and minimal interruption. Additionally, Harikane
and Koyama advocate for selecting fields that overlap with Subaru to
enhance synergies towards the study of galaxy evolution and highredshift studies. Kraemer advocates for choosing a field that contains
some nearby galaxies to significantly improve the cosmic distance
ladder by observing long-period variable stars in these galaxies.
Deustua recommends selecting calibration fields to improve the precision of all Roman measurements, critical for supernova cosmology.
In addition to the White Papers, 23 Science Pitches were also
submitted for the HLTDS21 . Many of these were followed up with
(longer) White Papers, but a significant number were not.
Goobar stresses that strongly lensed SNe Ia will provide additional
constraints on cosmological parameters, while Shajib emphasizes that
early detection of lensed SNe Ia in the HLTDS is crucial. Yahalomi
discusses how precision astrometry afforded by Roman, together

21

See https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/
roman/sci_pitch/ for a full listing.

5

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

6

with ground-based radial velocity observations, could detect solar
system analogs in the Survey fields. Pierel argues that inclusion of
the F814W (Z) and F213W (K) bands, in a wide field and deep field,
respectively, are essential for obtaining data for thousands of restframe near-IR SNe Ia, which are less affected by host galaxy dust,
as well as increasing the parameter space probed by the HLTDS
for all transients. Fausnaugh points out that the HLTDS provides a
unique opportunity to perform AGN reverberation mapping. Suzuki
advocates for coverage by the HLTDS of the Chandra Deep Field
South. Nugent describes synergies between the La Silla Schmidt
Southern Survey (LS4) with LSST and a possible southern HLTDS
field. Hickox describes how the HLTDS will be particularly valuable
for monitoring low-mass AGN. Finally, Gomez makes a generalized
pitch of how invaluable the HLTDS will be for studying all types of
transient phenomena.

Committee Process
The approach adopted by our committee was driven by two guiding
principles:
1. A desire to enable the broadest range of science possible, in particular science uniquely possible with Roman, given the constraints
of needing to satisfy the type Ia SNe cosmology requirements. In
our discussions it quickly became clear that (aside from SN Ia cosmology) there was no single science case that stood apart. Rather,
an extremely wide range of pressing questions in (astro)physics
could be addressed by a well-designed HLTDS, ranging from cosmology (e.g., lensed SNe) to reionization and the early Universe
(e.g., high-redshift pair instability SNe) to the physics of accretion
(e.g., AGN variability, tidal disruption events) and stellar evolution
(e.g., core-collapse SNe). That said, there were clearly science cases
that could be uniquely addressed by the large field-of-view and
NIR sensitivity of Roman, and our committee prioritized those
topics.
2. Given the limited time available to arrive at our recommendations,
as well as the significant effort that had been put into this topic
previously22 , the committee attempted to leverage external efforts
as much as possible. This took multiple forms over the course of
our work. We made repeated efforts to engage with the broader
community, from the initial Science Pitches and White Papers, to
outreach at scientific conferences (AAS, Roman Science Conference at Caltech), to the time-domain community working group
(STRIDE). We interacted closely with the RAPID and SN Cosmol-

22

R. Hounsell et al. Simulations of
the WFIRST Supernova Survey and
Forecasts of Cosmological Constraints.
ApJ, 867(1):23, November 2018. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/aac08b; and B. M.
Rose et al. A Reference Survey for
Supernova Cosmology with the Nancy
Grace Roman Space Telescope. arXiv eprints, art. arXiv:2111.03081, November
2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2111.03081

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

ogy Project Infrastructure Teams. And we were fortunate to have
close collaboration with the Roman Project Team, including members at Goddard Space Flight Center, the Space Telescope Science
Institute, and Caltech/IPAC.
Towards these ends, our first task was to familiarize ourselves with
the type Ia SNe cosmology requirements. Committee members read
the Science Requirements Document (RST-SYS-REQ-0020, Revision
D) and received a presentation from the Roman Project team on
performance details relevant to the SN Ia cosmology science.
Second, we learned about the efforts undertaken by the two previous SN Ia Science Investigation Teams. We carefully examined the
Design Reference Mission described in Rose et al. (2021), in order to
better understand the trade offs that were considered as part of this
effort.
Next, we read the Science Pitches and White Papers that were
flagged as relevant to the HLTDS. All Science Pitches and White Papers were assigned at least 3 readers on the committee, and discussed
during committee deliberations. Where necessary individual authors
were contacted to provide additional information.
At this stage, the committee’s efforts were split into four different
sub-groups, each of which worked in parallel but reported progress
to the entire committee at biweekly Zoom meetings. The four subgroups were:
• Imaging Implementation: Responsible for defining the detailed
survey strategy (filters used, areal coverage, depth, and cadence)
for the imaging portion of the HLTDS-CC
• Spectroscopy Implementation: Responsible for defining the detailed survey strategy (fraction of time, areal coverage, and depth)
for the spectroscopic portion of the HLTDS-CC
• Field Selection: Responsible for defining the specific fields
utilized for the HLTDS-CC
• Survey Extensions: Responsible for examining potential survey
extensions, including reference imaging / a pilot survey early in
the Roman prime mission phase, extended observations over the
entire Roman prime mission phase, and possible F213W (K-band)
observations.
Finally, the findings from the different working groups were synthesized into a single, comprehensive set of recommendations for the
implementation of the HLTDS.

7

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

Discussion of Results
Imaging Implementation
Designing an optimal and effective imaging component for the
HLTDS involves balancing the unique capabilities of Roman and
accounting for existing data sets as well as concurrent surveys, in
particular, the Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(LSST).
To optimize the choice of cadence, filters, depth, area, and number
of tiers, we relied on both simulations and the committee’s collective
expert knowledge of transient science. Simulations are necessary to
qualitatively study the trade-offs between the various survey parameters. However, it is also important to account for the assumptions
embedded in the simulations. For example, simulations alone tend
to favor large areas and a limited number of filters to maximize the
number of supernovae, neglecting unknown systematics.
Rubin’s LSST is scheduled to begin survey operations in mid-tolate 2025. Their Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs) will monitor ≈ 100 deg2
over 10 years, yielding many thousands of high-quality SN Ia light
curves with median redshift z ≈ 0.6. To complement this data set, it
is desirable to target substantially higher redshifts with Roman and
to observe in the reddest bands possible.
We ran a large grid of survey simulations, varying the cadence,
areal coverage, depth, and filters used, while maintaining a fixed
overall survey time23 . With help from the SN Project Infrastructure
Team, the simulations were run using both the SNANA simulation
package24 , as well a forecasting package provided by D. Rubin, as a
cross-check for consistency.
To evaluate the efficacy of the simulations, we estimated the resulting DETF FoM under the following set of assumptions:
• The Roman SN Ia data set was combined with a nearby sample of
800 “anchor” SNe Ia at z < 0.1, as well as a high-quality intermediate redshift sample of 3,500 ugrizY SNe Ia light curves from
Rubin.
• Cosmic microwave background (CMB) prior based on the R-shift
parameter computed from the input cosmology – flat ΛCDM with
Ωm = 0.315. An uncertainty of σR = 0.0044 is assumed.
• The systematic uncertainties included are: a) 0.005 mag zeropoint
error for Roman and LSST, b) 5 Å error on mean filter wavelength
for Roman and LSST, c) 0.0071 mag Å−1 in global calibration, d)
nonlinearity of 0.05% over 4.5 dex (Roman only), e) 0.01 shift in
host photo-z’s (Roman only), f) 20% increase in σ (host-photo-z)

23
Set to 180 d, the entire in-guide
allocation for the HLTDS.
24

Richard Kessler et al. SNANA: A
Public Software Package for Supernova Analysis. PASP, 121(883):1028,
September 2009. doi: 10.1086/605984

8

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

9

(Roman only), g) 4 × 10−5 shift in spec-z (LSST only), and h) 5%
error in Galactic E( B − V ) for Roman and LSST.
We emphasize that the absolute values of the resulting DETF FoMs
depend sensitively on these assumptions, and as a result there
is strong motivation to provide significant margin in the survey
design to meet the Roman SN Ia cosmology requirements. For
example, for identical survey designs, the resulting DETF FoM varied
by as much as 5–10% just between the different simulation packages.
However, the relative FoM values comparing different survey designs
were generally found to be robust.
Under the above set of assumptions, the DETF FoM was generally
maximized in survey designs with at least two imaging tiers25 , each
with 4-5 filters, and a cadence of 8–10 d. However, within this general area of survey space, the variation in DETF FoM was relatively
modest (i.e., a shallow maximum), and a broad range of strategies
appeared viable. As a result, considerations other than the DETF
FoM (e.g., non-SN Ia science) could have an appreciable impact on
the HLTDS design.
We recommend two distinct imaging tiers – Wide and Deep – that
target SN Ia at z = 0.9 and z = 1.7 respectively. The Wide Tier is
imaged in the RZYJH filters, while the Deep Tier utilizes ZYJHF. The
combination of two tiers and the selected filters enables sufficient
coverage in both wavelength and redshift space, allowing for the collection of a broad and statistically robust sample of SN Ia (Figure 2).
We verified this filter complement also enables robust photometric
classification of transient sources, which will be critical given the
depths reached by the HLTDS in the NIR.

25

To target intermediate- and highredshift SNe Ia separately.

Figure 2: zHD distribution after cosmology analysis, for four SN Ia subsets.
The two-tiered approach recommended
here for the Roman HLTDS enables SN
Ia discovery over a broad range of redshifts that complements ground-based
samples from Rubin. zHD is the Hubble diagram redshift: zspec for LSST
and zphot for Roman. Credit: Kessler,
Hounsell, Joshi et al 2024. This plot will
be updated to reflect the final in-guide
strategy (differences ∼10%).

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

We considered adding K-band (F213W) observations to the HLTDSCC; however, the dramatically reduced sensitivity26 made it infeasible for routine observations. We reconsider a (significantly) reduced
cadence of K-band observations as part of the possible Survey Extensions below.
We also note that while there is significant overlap in the redshift
distribution between the Wide and Deep Tiers (Figure 2), targeting
a lower redshift for the Wide Tier would result in additional overlap
with the Rubin sample (in terms of both redshift and filter coverage), thus not taking full advantage of the NIR sensitivity offered
by Roman. The larger areal coverage would also reduce the survey
efficiency due to increased slew times. Furthermore, light curves in
the Deep Imaging Tier have significantly higher S/N compared to the
Wide Imaging Tier at a given redshift.
Because of the relatively long time scale associated with SNe Ia27 ,
the DETF FoM was generally maximized for imaging cadences ≥10 d
(Figure 3). While longer cadences may be preferred by the simulations, these neglect systematic uncertainties in the light curve model,
and thus a somewhat higher cadence is preferable for cosmological
analyses. Furthermore, even cadences of 10 d would miss some of
the exciting fast-evolving non-SN Ia transients that Roman can, in
principle, uniquely probe (e.g., kilonova28 ).

10

26

In the sense of AB magnitude per unit
exposure time.

27

Particularly when cosmological time
dilation is factored in.

28

Igor Andreoni et al. Enabling kilonova science with Nancy Grace Roman
Space Telescope. Astroparticle Physics,
155:102904, February 2024. doi:
10.1016/j.astropartphys.2023.102904

Figure 3: DETF FoM as a function of
survey cadence for the Wide and Deep
Imaging Tiers. In particular for the
Deep Imaging Tier, cadences ≥ 10 d are
strongly preferred in these simulations.
Note, however, that these simulations
do not include systematic uncertainties
in light curve template fitting. For this
reason we recommend an “interlaced”
cadence of 10 d for both the Wide and
Deep Tiers. Credit: D. Rubin.

For these reasons, rather than observing the complete filter set
every 10 d, we recommend splitting the filters into two sets and observing each with a cadence of 5 d. The bluest filter of each tier is
observed each visit - i.e., in the Wide, we observe in RZJ on day 0
and RYH on day 5; in the deep, ZYH on day 0 and ZJF on day 5. This
interlaced strategy allows us to capture rapidly evolving transients

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

in addition to SN Ia. The repetition of the bluest filter in each tier
will also provide a method of differentiating color vs. flux evolution,
classification, and potentially improve photo-z calculations. The visits
do not need to be exactly 5 days apart29 . We can tolerate ∆ ≈ 1 day
as long as the mean is 5 d.
The exposure time in a given filter is set to achieve a fixed S/N
near maximum light and it is determined by the cadence and target
redshift according to the following formula:
s
cadence
S/N = 10
.
(2)
2.5(1 + ztarget )
So in a ±5-day-range around maximum light, there will be an average S/N of 20 for the median SN at that redshift. The exposure times
per visit are shown in Table 1.
Dithering was given serious consideration by the committee. Splitting the exposures in each visit to 2-3 will help with cosmic-ray rejection, smoothing out detector defects, and filling in gaps between detectors. However, dithering also adds overhead (slew/settle time plus
added exposure time to offset read noise), which is significant given
the relatively short exposure times in most of our filters. We therefore
choose not to dither except possibly in the Deep Tier F-band. Slight
dithers across visits are favorable (i.e., not rotating around a fixed
axis) to avoid circular, onion-like patterns in the exposure map.
In addition to the SN Ia cosmology results described above, the
HLTDS-CC will be a rich source of non-SN Ia transients and variables. Figures 4 and 5 highlight some of the additional source classes
that can be recovered using the HLTDS-CC survey strategy described
here.

11

29

In fact for variable science there
is a benefit to stagger the cadence
somewhat to minimize aliasing.

Filter
R (F062)
Z (F087)
Y (F106)
J (F129)
H (F158)
F (F184)

Wide

Deep

60 ×2
86
96
153
293
—

—
194 ×2
294
307
419
1637

Table 1: Recommended exposure times
(s) per epoch in the Wide and Deep
imaging Tiers.

Figure 4: Simulated (true) redshift
distribution of various Supernova
subsets by Roman. Large samples of
core-collapse SNe (both H-rich and
H-poor) will be discovered out to very
high-z, providing unique constraints
on star formation and stellar evolution.
Credit: Rick Kessler - SN PIT. This
plot will be updated to reflect the final
in-guide strategy (differences ∼10%).

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

12

Figure 5: Simulated (true) redshift
distribution of various exotic transient
subsets by Roman. Significant samples
even of these rare source classes will
be identified in the early Universe.
The rates of tidal disruption events
(TDEs) and pair-instability SNe (PISNe)
are low and highly uncertain. They
were artificially multiplied by factors
of 10 and 4, respectively, to increase
the number of detected events. Credit:
Rick Kessler - SN PIT. This plot will
be updated to reflect the final in-guide
strategy (differences ∼10%), and to
show actual source yields.

Spectroscopy Implementation
A unique capability of Roman is cadenced spectroscopy of transients
discovered in the HLTDS. Spectroscopic monitoring of transients
with Roman’s prism can potentially be used to improve SN Ia distances, classify transients, build templates and training sets for a
wide variety of transients, and provide spectroscopic monitoring of
extragalactic variables from SN to AGN.
The main trade for slitless spectroscopy with Roman’s prism is
the survey area, because the prism requires relatively long exposure
times. The DETF FoM scales strongly with the survey area, due to
the increasing number of SN Ia discovered in larger solid angles. On
the surface, there appears to be a tension with the primary goal of
the HLTDS and the spectroscopic observations. However, recent work
suggests that cadenced spectroscopy can improve SN Ia standardization and decrease the impact of systematic errors30 . The magnitude
of these gains is disputed in the literature31 , and so the balance of
spectroscopy is a complicated decision. While the known uncertainties in SN Ia cosmology favor minimizing the prism time in order
to maximize the SN Ia sample, poorly constrained or hitherto undetected systematic effects might benefit from increased prism time.
The working group considered 3 main lines of questioning: (1)
What are the main benefits to the cosmology analysis from SN Ia
spectra? (2) What science cases, if any, required faster cadence with
the prism than provided in the reference survey? (3) What other
science cases would most benefit from increasing the fraction of
prism time?
(1) What are the main benefits to the cosmology analysis

30

H. K. Fakhouri et al. Improving
Cosmological Distance Measurements Using Twin Type Ia Supernovae.
ApJ, 815(1):58, December 2015. doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/815/1/58; K. Boone
et al. The Twins Embedding of Type
Ia Supernovae. II. Improving Cosmological Distance Estimates. ApJ, 912
(1):71, May 2021a. doi: 10.3847/15384357/abec3b; and David Rubin et al.
Evaluating and Optimizing a Slitless
Prism for Nancy Grace Roman Space
Telescope SN Cosmology. arXiv e-prints
(astro-ph/2206.10632), June 2022
31

Ryan J. Foley et al. Significant luminosity differences of two twin Type Ia
supernovae. MNRAS, 491(4):5991–5999,
February 2020. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3324; and Yukei S. Murakami
et al. Leveraging SN Ia spectroscopic
similarity to improve the measurement of H 0 . JCAP, 2023(11):046,
November 2023. doi: 10.1088/14757516/2023/11/046

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

13

from SN Ia spectra?

Spectroscopic time series of SN Ia have the potential for improved
standardization of SN Ia light curves. Recent work suggests that
there is a 3-parameter space embedded in SN Ia spectra near-peak
that predicts the SN Ia peak brightness32 . This method of standardization may also reduce systematic errors, such as correlations of host
galaxy properties with peak magnitude. A variety of methods have
been used to investigate the 3D parameter space, but so far (a) the
main physical parameters have not been identified, and (b) the magnitude of the improvement for cosmological analysis has not been
settled.
The prism is not sensitive enough to provide a large training set
(with high SNR) that is comparable to state-of-the-art spectroscopic
analysis from ground-based surveys. However, the spectroscopic
standardization models can be applied to the Roman SN Ia with
prism observations, there will be several thousand SN Ia with time
series spectroscopic observations, and we expect a sample up to 20
times larger than that of existing SN Ia samples used in spectroscopic
standardization analyses (Figure 6). Roman therefore presents an
exciting possibility for investigating and characterizing systematic
uncertainties in SN Ia distances using spectroscopy.
A forecasting analysis suggests that the FoM is roughly constant
with prism fraction when using spectroscopic standardization. The
size of the SN Ia sample with prism observations increases roughly
linearly with prism fraction, and these SN make significant improvements to the FoM. However, the total survey area decreases, which
decreases the photometric sample and puts downwards pressure on
the FoM. Meanwhile, the photometric analysis generally gives a decreasing FoM for increasing prism time, because the total area of the
survey is smaller.
To choose the total time spent on prism, we picked a value that
would yield a good FoM using either photometric standardization
(SALT333 ) or spectroscopic standardization. Based on a suite of simulations, we found that about 14% of the total Core Component time
used for prism observations yields a FoM in the top 7% of simulations using photometric analysis, and that 0% prism time gives only
a 2% improvement in the FoM. On the other hand, spectroscopic
analysis for a 28% prism CC fraction improves the FoM by 2% compared to a 14% prism fraction. These ranges (14 to 28 per cent) bound
the problem, because prism fractions below 14% or above 28% have
a relatively small impact on the FoM for the same analysis, but a
prism fraction below 14% would limit the sample of SNIa with spectroscopy, while a prism fraction above 28% would limit the total SN
Ia sample size. We therefore propose ≈20% of the total CC survey

32

K. Boone et al. The Twins Embedding
of Type Ia Supernovae. I. The Diversity
of Spectra at Maximum Light. ApJ, 912
(1):70, May 2021b. doi: 10.3847/15384357/abec3c

33

W. D. Kenworthy et al. SALT3: An
Improved Type Ia Supernova Model
for Measuring Cosmic Distances. ApJL,
923(2):265, December 2021. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ac30d8

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

14

time to be used for prism observations.
(2) What science cases, if any, require faster cadence spectroscopy
than provided in the Design Reference Mission?

The working group did not identify any science cases that would
strongly benefit from a spectroscopic cadence faster than 5 days. The
bulk of transients discovered in the survey are at redshifts z > 0.5,
and an increase in prism time for faster cadence could not be justified
for the very small number of sources that would be discovered at low
redshift. At the intermediate and high redshifts, science requiring
fast cadence can be accomplished with the a 5 day (observer frame)
cadence (i.e., rapidly fading transients, early time observations of SN
close to the time of explosion, binary supermassive black holes in
AGN at short periods). Other high luminosity variables tend to have
longer timescales of variability (i.e., weeks to months for AGN), and
so a cadence faster than 5 days is not needed.
(3) What other science cases would most benefit from large
fractions of prism time?

The other major science cases for the Roman prism are classification/characterization of transients and static science. The key metric
for classification is the total yield of objects with reliable classifications. One White Paper (Aldering et al.) noted that Roman has the
unique capability to spectroscopically follow-up its own transients,
which is a challenge from the ground owing to the faint magnitudes
and other factors, such as hemisphere observability, operational status of a given observatory, and weather. Cadenced spectroscopy is
also a unique opportunity to look at the detailed spectral evolution of
transients.

Figure 6: SNR vs redshift of Type Ia
SN spectroscopic observations in one
example with 25 days prism exposure
(14% of 180 days) in the Wide (900-sec
exposures) and Deep (3600 sec) prism
tiers. A large sample is accumulated
over the course of the HLTDS; however,
note that the SNR values quoted here
are derived after stacking all spectra of
a given source, and derived over the
rest-frame bandpass from 5000-6000 Å.
This plot will be updated to reflect
the final in-guide strategy (differences
∼10%).

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

15

One difficulty, however, is the sensitivity of the prism, which limits
the SNR of the majority of objects in the field. This limitation is offset
to some extent by the slow evolution of the transients at high redshift. By combining spectra across the time series for each object, the
effective SNR of each object will be higher for purposes of classification and characterization. Robust analysis tools using the time-series
spectra are not yet standard in the field, but acquiring the time-series
spectra in the HLTDS-CC will make it possible to classify a larger
number of objects if such tools become more widespread.
The total yield of transients favors a larger area of prism observations, while better SNR for individual objects favors a smaller field
with longer exposure times. Within the 20% limit on prism fraction
imposed by the SN Ia and cosmology science, we explored the relative yields and SNRs of both strategies. We found that it is better
to include both a wide and a deep prism tier. The wide tier yields
a large sample of transients with spectroscopy, while the deep tier
yields a reasonable number of transients with higher SNR spectra as
well as a sample pushing to redshifts greater than 1.0.

To set the parameters of the prism wide and deep tiers, we turn
to additional survey constraints. The area covered by prism observations will be small because the prism exposures must be long. Roman
pointings should be set in an axisymmetric pattern, so that rotations of the telescope over the year minimize edge effects. For small
fields, this results in a “quantization” effect, where certain preset patterns clearly optimize the overall area: examples are a 1 × 2 pointing
scheme for 0.56 deg2 (6×6 detectors) or a 2 × 3 + 1 pointing scheme
for 1.68 deg2 (12×9 detectors), see Figure 7.
For the deep prism tier (target redshift 1.7, exposure time = 3600 s),
covering 0.56 deg2 requires 7% of the CC survey time, while 1.68 deg2
requires 20% of the total CC survey time. Given a maximum of 20%
of the prism time and the need for both a wide and deep tier, the

Figure 7: Examples of plausible Roman
pointing patterns for very small fields.
The roll angle will change over one
year of observations, and so small
fields should be axisymmetric and
positioned to minimize edge effects.
The cumulative distribution functions
(CDFs) show the cumulative area
observed a certain number of of times
per year—an optimized pointing will
be as many observations per year as
possible (to the left on these plots)
over as much solid angle as possible
(towards the top of these plots). The
2×3 mosaic pattern consists of 3.5 times
as many pointings as the 1×3 pattern,
and would require >20% of the total
survey time to acquire. Therefore, we
choose the deep prism field to be the
1×2 mosaic pattern, which costs 7% of
the total survey time; the other 13% of
prism survey time will go into a wide
tier, covering 4.1 deg2 .

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

16

deep prism tier should be 0.56 deg2 , using 7% of the total CC survey
time. The remaining 13% prism fraction is allocated to a Wide Prism
Tier, which can cover an area of 4.1 deg2 (given the planned depth).
Both tiers will be embedded in the larger HLTDS-CC Deep Imaging
Tier (see below).

Field Selection
Two White Papers – Rose and Aldering – summarize the viable field
choices for the HLTDS-CC (Figure 8). The fields are required to be
in the Roman Continuous Viewing Zone (CVZ), corresponding to
ecliptic latitude |ϵ| > 54◦ . Furthermore, to maximize the transient
discovery rate, minimal foreground extinction is preferred. Complementary pre-existing and contemporaneous multi-wavelength data
sets are strongly desired. And an additional challenge is the relative
merit of a Northern vs. Southern field choice.

Figure 8: Possible field selections for
the HLTDS-CC (equatorial projection).
The fields must reside in the CVZ
(|ϵ| > 54◦ ), should have minimal
foreground extinction, and maximal
pre-existing and contemporaneous
multi-wavelength coverage. Credit:
David Rubin

We concluded that splitting time between the North and South
would be prudent. By widely separating the fields in right ascension,
this ensures that at least some area of the HLTDS-CC is visible to
ground-based observers year-round. Two distinct areas provide the
possibility of making use of the Subaru’s contribution to Roman and
overlap with Rubin34 , and also enable the possibility of a jack-knife
test for the SN Ia cosmological analysis, i.e. to mitigate against the
possibility of cosmic variance. Of course, however, additional slew
time would be incurred.
In the North, the ELAIS-N1 field35 was felt to be the logical choice
(Figure 9). ELIAS-N1 has been observed in various wavelength
ranges 36 . Deep optical data have been obtained by the Subaru/HSC
SSP Deep Survey (grizy) and PanSTARRS Medium Deep Survey
(grizy). The Subaru/HSC SSP Deep Survey also provides some narrow filter observations (N387, N816, N921). Deep infrared data in

34

Note that due to the ecliptic latitude
constraints, no single Roman CVZ field
would be visible to both observatories.

35

Seb Oliver et al. The European
Large Area ISO Survey - I. Goals,
definition and observations. MNRAS,
316(4):749–767, August 2000. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03550.x
36

R. Kondapally et al. The LOFAR Twometer Sky Survey: Deep Fields Data
Release 1. III. Host-galaxy identifications and value added catalogues. A&A,
648:A3, April 2021. doi: 10.1051/00046361/202038813

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

17

ELAIS-N1 are obtained by UKIDSS (JHK) and the Spitzer SWIRE and
SERVS surveys (3.6um, 4.5um, 5.6um, 8um, 24um, 70um, 160um).
The u band data are available from the SpARCS survey of CFHT.
GALEX obtained deep images in the NUV and FUV bands in this
field. Deep X-ray data are available from Chandra and deep radio
data are available from LOFAR.
Furthermore, ELAIS-N1 is well-positioned for observations with
Subaru, and the foreground extinction is very low (AV = 0.02 mag).

Figure 9: Multi-wavelength coverage in
the ELAIS-N1 field (from Kondapally et
al. 2021).

In the South, the most logical choices are the LSST Deep Drilling
Fields (DDFs), with CDFS and COSMOS being far and away the best
choices from the perspective of synergy with LSST synoptic data;
CDFS for its wealth of multi-wavelength data, and COSMOS for the
combination of multi-wavelength data and plans for accelerated (and
extended) time-domain coverage (10-years of coverage in 3-years,
plus continued monitoring for the remaining 7 years). However,
neither are in the Roman CVZ. COSMOS is quite far away from the
CVZ; CDFS is much closer and might be re-considered if the CVZ
constraint could be slightly loosened.
With that said, the next most logical choice is the Euclid Deep
Field South (EDFS). LSST will observe it with 2 pointings (so, double the area of the other LSST DDFs), but at only half the cumulative
depth, in order to keep the total time the same as the other DDFs. So
the time domain synergy with Roman is weaker than for CDFS. Nevertheless, the combination of Roman and Rubin in the EDFS would

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

18

provide a unique combination of cadence and wavelength coverage
that would enable much science beyond the core SN program.
In terms of wide vs. deep, it was noted that the overlap region of
the EDFS would have double the time coverage and greater depth
than the rest of the LSST EDFS, thus the overlap region would make
for a logical location for the deep portion of the HLTDS-CC. One important caveat is the lack of deep X-ray data to complement the deep
LSST+Roman photometry (as compared to what one might have for
CDFS). We hope that the selection of this field for the HLTDS-CC
will motivate additional multi-wavelength coverage of the EDFS (Figure 10).

Survey Extensions
The committee considered a variety of extensions to the HLTDS-CC –
longer (and shorter) temporal baselines, wavelength augmentations,
etc. Here we summarize these discussions.

Figure 10: This is a corn field in Iowa.
People who get this reference about
motivating EDFS X-ray coverage probably also like root beer and peanut
butter.

Pilot Component: The primary HLTDS-CC will collect data only in

the central 2 years of the 5-year prime Roman lifetime. While it is
necessary for the HLTDS-CC to be finite in duration37 , waiting a full
18 months to collect any HLTDS data carries significant risk for the
successful achievement of the Roman SN cosmology goals. Our
committee therefore felt strongly that a Pilot Component (HLTDSPC) should be included in the in-guide survey.
Motivations for the HLTDS-PC are myriad, including:

37

To accommodate the several monthlong continuous observations of microlensing Bulge fields.

• Deep reference images are required to remove underlying host
galaxy emission in SN light curves, and these are most effective
when they lack any SN light.
• The rate of SNe Ia at z > 1 is highly uncertain with individual
measurements ranging by a factor of ∼ 2 with similar uncertainties38 , and the DETF FoM depends sensitively on acquiring a
sufficiently large high-z sample. Measuring this rate before the
HLTDS-CC would allow adjustments (e.g., more or less area in the
Deep Tier) should they be necessary.
• To increase efficiency, our proposed in-guide HLTDS-CC lacks any
spatial dithering. An HLTDS-PC would verify on-sky if bona fide
transients can be distinguished from cosmic rays in single epoch
(but multi-filter) visits.
• Prism data obtained at multiple roll angles will enable testing of
host-galaxy subtraction and/or forward-modeling software to
extract the SN spectrum. These data will also serve as templates
for SN discovered in the Core Component.

38

Louis-Gregory Strolger et al. Delay
Time Distributions of Type Ia Supernovae from Galaxy and Cosmic Star
Formation Histories. ApJ, 890(2):140,
February 2020. doi: 10.3847/15384357/ab6a97

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

• An HLTDS-PC could be used to train machine-learning transient
classifiers for Roman. While a number of such classifiers have
been developed for Rubin39 , the lack of sensitive, wide-field NIR
surveys has largely precluded this development for Roman.
• The HLTDS-PC observations can be used to test data reduction
pipelines and analysis tools, which is particularly important for
the real-time notifications planned by the RAPID Project Infrastructure Team.

39

V. Ashley Villar et al. SuperRAENN:
A Semisupervised Supernova Photometric Classification Pipeline Trained
on Pan-STARRS1 Medium-Deep Survey
Supernovae. ApJ, 905(2):94, December
2020. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc6fd

• HLTDS-PC will also enable early non-transient deep-field science and follow-up spectroscopy such as discovery of the highestredshifts galaxies and AGN, studying the epoch of reionization,
measurement of the UV luminosity function and other static science discussed in several White Papers.
At least ≈8 individual epochs at the depth of a single HLTDS-PC
visit are necessary to construct a sufficiently deep reference image
that its noise contribution will be negligible. We simulated different
cadences for the HLTDS-PC, ranging from 10–30 d. While the 10 d
cadence would match that from the HLTDS-CC, our simulations
indicated that a 3-month duration40 for the HLTDS-PC would be
very inefficient, in that many SNe Ia at the beginning and end would
not have sufficient light curve coverage for cosmological analysis
(particularly those at high-z). At the other end, a 30 d cadence was
found to be too infrequent for reliable classification, and would be
extremely difficult to schedule with the Bulge Survey fields. Instead
we recommend 8 visits at a 20 d cadence for the HLTDS-PC for both
imaging and prism spectroscopy. All other aspects of the HLTDS-PC
would mimic those of the HLTDS-CC (area, filters, exposure times,
etc.).
Extended Component: Roman will be uniquely capable of detect-

ing some of the dimmest and therefore highest-redshift transients
ever discovered. Moreover, Roman will be able to systematically
explore their population by discovering multiples of these in a systematic way. One limitation of the HLTDS-CC is its relatively short
nominal duration of two years. For the longest-duration transients,
the HLTDS-CC would likely miss their rise or decline, preventing
characterization. Here we explore the possibility of an Extended
Component (HLTDS-EC), which would increase the duration of the
HLTDS by at least 2.5 years at a much slower cadence of at most
90 days. This survey is optimized to discover the most luminous,
longest duration, and highest redshift transients. The suggestion for
an HLTDS-EC was motivated by a number of White Papers (Fox,
Gomez, Karmen, Moriya, Yamada).
The HLTDS-EC is designed to answer one of the biggest questions

19

40

10 d × 10 epochs.

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

20

in time domain astronomy: how do transients evolve with redshift?
Discovering and characterizing transients as a function of redshift
will motivate studies of both stellar evolution and black hole evolution. By measuring the physical parameters and rates of SNe as a
function of redshift we can make inferences about the IMF. Similarly,
measuring the masses of supermassive black holes (SMBHs) can tell
us about their formation and how they impact their galaxies. We focus our exploration of the HLTDS-EC by determining how well these
observations can characterize tidal disruption events (TDEs), superluminous supernovae (SLSNe), and pair-instability supernovae (PISNe).
These transients are chosen given that they are the most luminous
and longest-duration explosive transients known, and directly relevant to the scientific questions of stellar and black hole evolution
(Figure 11; Gomez, Moriya, Karmen).

We define a relative EC FoM for each type of transient (SLSNe,
PISNe, TDEs) as the ratio of the number of these objects that can
be discovered by adding the HLTDS-EC compared to the HLTDSCC alone. We consider a transient to have enough photometry to
be adequately characterized if it is detected in at least two epochs
before peak, one during peak, and at least three epochs after peak.
Additionally, we require the detections to span at least 30 rest-frame
days in coverage. We derive the corresponding limits on the survey
using Pandeia 2024.9.1.
We find that the reddest filters are the most optimal for detecting
these high-redshift, long-duration transients. The most effective filter
for detecting these is F158W (H), followed by F184W (F). Four filters
provide enough color information to characterize the transient. The
addition of F213W (K) is greatly beneficial to differentiate types of
transients (Moriya Whitepaper) – however, it is also significantly
less sensitive41 We therefore consider F213W (K) band observations
separately below.
Our simulations indicate that: 1) A temporal extension to the

Figure 11: Example light curves of long
duration transients at high redshift,
including a PISN at z = 3.0 (left), a
SLSN at z = 5.0 (middle), and a TDE
at z = 7.0 (right). The solid points
represented stacked images of the
nominal HLTDS-CC survey, which
does not capture the full evolution of
these long duration transients. The
shaded regions represent the proposed
coverage of the HLTDS-EC, which will
greatly increase the ability to find and
characterize these transients.

41

In terms of AB magnitude reached in
a fixed integration time.

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

21

HLTDS-CC can have a dramatic impact (EC FoM ∼2–3) on the
discovery of high-z transients such as TDEs, SLSNe, and PISNe
(Figure 12); 2) The EC FoM benefits more from a longer temporal
baseline than increased cadence. Therefore we recommend that the
HLTDS-EC be included in the in-guide request, and that it cover as
long a period of time as possible – at least 2, and up to 3 years, before
and after the HLTDS-CC. A cadence of 120 d is sufficient to more
than double the number of discoveries of these critical sources.
However, given the focus on the high-z universe, and the lack of
the reddest filters employed in the HLTDS-CC Wide Imaging Tier, we
recommend the HLTDS-EC only cover the Deep Imaging Tier fields
with an identical observing strategy as that employed for the HLTDSCC. After accounting for recommended in-guide observations from
both the HLTDS-CC and HLTDS-PC, the HLTDS-EC would require
∼ 8 additional epochs.

We also note that the addition of visits in the HLTDS-EC will also
recover some SN Ia lost in the edges – i.e., those with peak brightness
near the beginning and end of the 2-year HLTDS-CC. Simulations
show that ≈ 250 high-z SN Ia can actually be recovered by slightly
reducing the cadence (30-60 days) just before and after the HLTDSCC.
K-Band Imaging: Several White Papers advocated for the addition

of K-band (F213) to the HLTDS (e.g., Moriya, Fox). By extending the
wavelength coverage to the reddest band possible with Roman, several exciting scientific opportunities are opened. Fox describes how
by increasing the redshift horizon accessible for Roman SNe, it may
be possible to test Initial Mass Function (IMF) evolution scenarios,
as well as constrain the contribution of massive stars to the reionization of the Universe. Moriya demonstrates that while the HLTDS will
detect PISNe out to z > 6, distinguishing them from the much larger
population of more mundane SNe will be greatly facilitated by the

Figure 12: The FoM of the HLTDS-EC
is defined as the ratio of transients
recovered in the extended compared
to the nominal HLTDS-CC. We include
measures of this metric for PISNe (left),
SLSNe (middle), and TDEs (right). A
higher cadence results in a higher FoM
for all transients. A cadence of 120
is the minimum needed to achieve a
FoM of 2-3 for most transients and
redshifts.

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

22

Figure 1: Theoretical light curves of a PISN at high redshifts in the F158 (left) and F213 (right) filters (Moriya et
al. 2022b).
PISN light
curve13).
model
withthe
thetremendous
initial mass of
250 Msun that explodes as a red supergiant from
addition
of AK-band
(Figure
Given
importance
al. (2011)
is adopted. the committee felt there was strong
ofKasen
theseettopics
in astrophysics,
scientific motivation for K-band observations.

Figure 2: Color-magnitude diagrams in F158-F184 (left) and F158-F213 (right). F213 is required to distinguish highFigure 13: Color magnitude diagrams
redshift PISNe and SLSNe from other low-redshift SNe (Moriya et al. 2022b).
At the same time, K-band presents several technical challenges.
References
Due to the increased thermal background at these
wavelengths, KBrielobservations
et al. 2022,are
MNRAS,
1315 than any other filter on
band
much 514,
less sensitive
Farmer
al. 2020,
ApJ,per
902,unit
36 exposure time). For example, to
Roman
(inetterms
of depth
Heger
2002,
ApJ,mag
567,(as
532
reach
an &
ABWoosley
magnitude
of 26.5
advocated by Moriya) reHirano
et al. s2015,
MNRAS,just
448,
quires
≈10,000
of exposure,
for568
a single pointing! Furthermore,
Hsiao
et late
al. 2023,
arXiv:2305.03042
due
to the
addition
of K-band to the filter complement, the calKasen requirements
et al. 2011, ApJ,
734,filter
102 are much relaxed compared to
ibration
on this
Collaboration
2021,
arXiv:2122.03634
allLIGO-Virgo-KAGRA
other bands, resulting
in significantly
less
utility for cosmological
Moriya et al.
2022a,
A&A,of666,
A157exciting sources described by
applications.
Finally,
many
the most
Moriya
et Papers
al. 2022b,
925, 211
these
White
haveApJ,
significant
uncertainty in their rates, and
Moriya
et al. 2019,
Scienceany
Reviews,
214, 5942 .
thus
the possibility
of Space
not detecting
is appreciable
Pan
et al.
422,
Given
the2012,
desireMNRAS,
to balance
the2701
tremendous reward from discovery of the highest-z transients, together with the significant risks
described above, the committee recommends implementing K-band
observations as part of our Over-Guide request. Annual observations
of the Deep Imaging Tier in K-band would require ≈ 16 d.

for PISNe (red) compared with the
broader population of “regular” SNe
(blue and pink). With just F158 (H)
and F184 (F) band data, the PISNe
are largely indistinguishable. Adding
F213W (K-band) observations allows
these rare sources to be identified
efficiently. Credit: T. Moriya.

42

Though this may be an interesting
result in and of itself!

Full-Filter Imaging of the Deep Tier: After stacking of the full

data set, the Roman HLTDS Deep Imaging Tier will likely be the
deepest integrations of any area on the sky obtained by Roman, offering a multitude of opportunities for static galaxy science. However,
the HLTDS-CC Deep Imaging Tier only utilizes the Z, Y, J, H, and F
filters. In the Joshi White Paper, the authors argue for the multiple
benefits of obtaining observations of this tier in all broadband Roman filters43 to improve our understanding of star formation and
quiescence at cosmic noon, as well as to improve the accuracy and

43

Excluding the extremely wide F146
filter.

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

23

precision of photometric redshifts. Given that R-band can also be obtained by ground-based observatories (though with poorer angular
resolution), we did not prioritize full filter coverage of the Deep Tier
in our in-guide allocation. But with the additional time available in
the over-guide allocation (and the K-band observations described
above), we recommend conducting imaging of the Deep Tier with the
R-band filter to complete the full set of broadband filter observations.

Technical Implementation
In-Guide Recommendations

Tier

Wide Imaging
Deep Imaging
Wide Spectroscopy
Deep Spectroscopy
Total Time

Pointings
[North:South]
38 : 27
7 : 16
0 :14
0:2

Area (deg2 )
[North:South]
10.68 :
1.97 :
0:
0:

7.59
4.50
4.50
0.56

PC
Time (days)
[North: South]

CC
Time (days)
[North: South]

EC
Time (days)
[North: South]

3.73 : 2.58
2.17 : 4.96
0 : 1.23
0 : 0.70
15.36

33.99 : 23.53
19.79 : 45.23
0: 22.47
0 : 12.86
157.84

0:0
2.17 : 4.96
0:0
0:0
7.12

in-guide44

Our recommended
implementation of the HLTDS includes three components (Table 2):
• Core Component (HLTDS-CC; 158 d): Conducted over the central two years of prime Roman operations, the HLTDS-CC is split
between a Wide Imaging Tier (18.3 deg2 , RZYJH filters, 32% of
the total in-guide allocation45 ), a Deep Imaging Tier (6.5 deg2 ,
ZYJHF filters, 36% of in-guide allocation), a Wide Spectroscopy
Tier (4.5 deg2 , 900 s exposures, 12% of in-guide allocation), and
a Deep Spectroscopy Tier (0.56 deg2 , 3600 s exposures, 7% of inguide allocation). Imaging Tiers are revisited with an interlaced
cadence of 10 d (filter subsets every 5 d), while Spectroscopy Tiers
employ a 5 d cadence. The Imaging Tiers are not dithered to maximize observing efficiency46 . Both Imaging Tiers are split between
the Northern ELAIS-N1 field and the Southern EDFS field, with
the Wide Imaging Tier more weighted to the North and the Deep
Imaging Tier more weighted to the South. Both Spectroscopy Tiers
are located in the EDFS, and both Deep Tiers are embedded within
the Wide Tiers to maximize efficiency (Figure 14). However, these
decisions should be revisited when the precise implementation
of Rubin’s observing strategy is known (e.g., exact pointings and

Table 2: In-Guide HLTDS Survey
Design
44

180 d allocation

45

35% of the HLTDS-CC. The Wide
Imaging Tier comprises 44% of the
HLTDS-CC, with 13% and 7% for the
Wide and Deep Spectroscopy Tiers,
respectively.

46

This should be revisted based on
results from the Pilot Component - see
below.

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

24

dithering strategy) and more information becomes available regarding the Roman-Subaru partnership. It might also be beneficial
to perform some prism spectroscopy in the Subaru fields.

Southern Field (EDFS)

Northern Field (ELAIS-N1)

Figure 14: Apportionment of Imaging
and Spectroscopy Tiers to the two
HLTDS Fields (ELAIS-N1 in the North,
and EDFS in the South). This plot
will be updated to reflect the detailed
pointing recommendations described
below.

Wide Imaging Fields

Wide Spectroscopy Field

Deep Imaging Fields

Deep Spectroscopy Field

We note that these areas are small and since we are observing
throughout the year and the telescope has rather stringent roll restrictions, the numbers of pointings shown in the second column
of Table 2 were carefully chosen to make the footprint as circular
as possible to minimize edge effects. These pointings cannot be arbitrarily changed without compromise of efficiency. For example,
the prism area in the South consists of 16 pointings in a 3 × 4 + 4
pattern with the central 2 pointings as a Deep Tier and the surrounding 14 pointings as Wide. As we observe this area through
the year, some area in between the Wide and Deep Tiers are observed at intermediate depths due to edge effects. This prism area
encompasses all of the Deep Imaging Tier in the South, which has
the same 16 pointings. The Wide Imaging Tier in the South with
27 pointings is made from a 4 × 5 + 7 mosaic pattern, which is also
circular. We chose this pattern to allow the possibility of separating the Wide and Deep Tiers in EDFS, which is covered by Rubin’s
DDF in two distinct pointings. In the North, we expect the Deep
Tier to be embedded in the Wide.
• Pilot Component (HLTDS-PC; 15 d): The overall setup of the
HLTDS-PC is identical to that of the HLTDS-CC, with one exception: observations should commence as early as possible within
the Roman prime phase, and repeat with a cadence of 20 d (for
both Imaging and Spectroscopy components). We have simulated
an 8 epoch HLTDS-PC with a 20 d cadence and find that ≈250 SNe

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

Ia at z > 1 will be recovered47 , a sufficiently large sample to verify
the assumptions underlying our HLTDS-CC design. Images from
the first visit can be used as templates for the subsequent visits. A
longer-than-20-day gap between the first and second visit might be
desirable, but not necessary.

25

47

Using the high-z SN Ia rate from
Strolger et al. (2020).

• Extended Component (HLTDS-EC; 7 d): To provide temporal coverage over the entire five-year duration of Roman prime operations
for long-duration transients and variables, we recommend a (temporal) extension of the HLTDS-CC. We recommend eight epochs
for the HLTDS-EC, each comprised only of Deep Imaging Tier
observations. Simulations of the full HLTDS implementation (Figure 15) imply that if the HLTDS-EC visits are placed reasonably
close before and after the HLTDS-CC, additional SN Ia can be recovered around the edges, making up for any modest reduction in
HLTDS-CC area, as well as increasing the sample of high-redshift
TDEs, SLSNe, and PISNe by a factor of 2–3.
Pilot Visits

Extended Visits
Core Component

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Simulating our recommended in-guide HTLDS survey, including
all three components, using the SNANA software package results
in a DETF FoM of ≈400. The committee believes that this provides
an appropriate level of margin to meet the SN Ia cosmology science
requirements, while also enabling a broad range of compelling timedomain astrophysics. These simulation results will be updated to
account for minor changes in survey design.

Figure 15: Recommended scheduling
of the HLTDS-CC, HLTDS-PC, and
HLTDS-EC. The combination of all
three components provides 1: a large
sample of high-z SNe Ia, sufficient to
meet the Roman cosmology requirements; 2: the opportunity to verify a
successful survey design early in the
mission lifetime; and, 3: Deep Imaging
Tier coverage over the entire prime
phase, for long-duration transients.

Under-Guide Recommendation
Our recommended under-guide48 implementation of the HLTDS by
necessity prioritizes the HLTDS-CC to ensure that the SN Ia cosmology requirements are met. The HLTDS-EC is dropped entirely. The
HLTDS-PC, however, is kept at the same level to obtain template images, which is critical to the success of SN Ia cosmology. We recommend that we keep the same 20-day cadence as in the in-guide. We
also reduced the Wide Imaging Tier area in the North to fit within
the allocation.
We stress that while our simulations indicate that this under-guide
implementation will meet the SN Ia cosmology requirements, we

48

160 d allocation

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

Tier

Pointings
[North:South]

Wide Imaging
Deep Imaging
Wide Spectroscopy
Deep Spectroscopy
Total Time

25 : 27
7 : 16
0 : 14
0:2

Area (deg2 )
[North:South]
7.02 :
1.97 :
0:
0:

7.59
4.50
4.50
0.56

PC
Time (days)
[North: South]

CC
Time (days)
[North: South]

2.42 : 2.58
2.17 : 4.96
0 : 1.23
0 : 0.70
14.06

22.12 : 23.53
19.79 : 45.23
0 : 22.47
0 : 12.86
146.00

are far from the systematic limit so any reduction in SN Ia yield
will reduce our FoM. Implementation of this HLTDS realization
would increase the reliance on other facilities (e.g., Rubin) to meet
Roman cosmology goals, and increase the risk of not meeting the
Roman SN Ia cosmology requirements altogether. And the lack of
an Extended Component will dramatically impact the discovery rate
of long-duration transients – given the modest sample size of these
sources to begin with (Figure 5), this will have a major impact on
some of the most compelling non-SN Ia science from the HLTDS.

1. Yearly K-band imaging in the Deep Imaging Tier. We recommend
taking 10,000-second exposures on a yearly cadence, which will
reach 26.5 mag per visit at the 10σ limit for isolated point sources.
If we make 6 visits in Year 0, 1, ..., 5, the total investment in exposure time is 16.0 days. This will help discover and identify a
sample of pair-instability SN and other transients very high redshift.
2. Non-cadenced R-band imaging also in the Deep Imaging Tier.
We recommend taking 15,000-second exposures, which will reach
29.4 mag at 10σ for isolated point sources. These exposures can be
taken any time and can also be broken up into a series of shorter

EC
Time (days)
[North: South]
0:
0:
0:
0:

0
0
0
0
0

Table 3: Under-Guide HLTDS Survey
Design.

Over-Guide Recommendation
We considered several possible options for the over-guide strategy49
including dithering our imaging observations, increasing the survey area, and observing in additional filters. Dithering each of our
exposures to fill in the chips gaps is actually not feasible unless we
significantly reduce the survey area. An increase in ≈ 10% area results in only a modest improvement in the dark energy FoM. We
therefore instead decided to enhance the value of the HLTDS dataset
for community science. We recommend the following two enhancements discussed in the previous section that will add legacy value to
the exquisite infrared data that Roman will collect.

26

49

200 d allocation

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

exposures. This will enhance static galaxy science around cosmic
noon, as well as improve galaxy photometric redshifts.

Constraints and Considerations
Sensitivity to Launch Date
Given the location of the survey fields in the Roman CVZ, the HLTDS
is quite insensitive to the start date of Roman operations. Our primary concern is that the HLTDS-PC and HLTDS-EC can be scheduled with the desired cadence, which will depend on when Galactic
Bulge microlensing campaigns are undertaken. Assuming these are
not undertaken in the first ≈6 months of Roman operations, we do
not anticipate significant issues with implementation of the HLTDS
due to the true launch date. In particular note that the cadence between EC epochs – 3-4 months on average – is longer than the continuous observing period of Bulge microlensing fields, and thus we
believe both programs should be readily schedulable.

Ancillary Data Sets
Achieving Roman SN cosmology requirements necessitates a highquality sample of SNe Ia across the full redshift range from z = 0 to
z ≈ 2. Given its wide field-of-view and NIR bandpass, together with
the low sky density of nearby SNe Ia (Figure 16), Roman is not the
optimal facility to generate this entire sample alone. Our committee
felt strongly that the HLTDS should prioritize the most distant
events, both for SNe Ia and for transients more broadly.
Thus to meet the SN cosmology requirements, ancillary data at
low (z < 0.1) and intermediate (z ∼ 0.5) redshifts are necessary.
For the intermediate redshifts, the Rubin Deep Drilling Fields will
naturally provide the requisite data set, both in terms of number of
SNe at the relevant distances, as well as photometric precision. Thus,
througout our analysis, we have assumed the availability of 3,500
high-quality SNe Ia light curves from Rubin Deep Drilling Fields
– removing this assumption would require a dramatic change in
survey strategy, covering a much larger area for the Wide Tier in
optical filters. We note that over its 10 year lifetime, Rubin should
acquire a sufficient sample of such events in the EDFS alone, and proposed joint observations with the Roman HLTDS-CC would provide
an excellent means of cross-calibration. While these Rubin SN Ia light
curves will be available to US astronomers, we strongly encourage
the Roman Project to negotiate their availability for the entire Roman
community to enable everyone to participate in SN cosmology with
the same data access.

27

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

28

Figure 16: Number of SNe Ia within
±10 d of maximum light within a given
Roman pointing. The rapid increase
at z > 0.5 (together with the NIR
bandpass) strongly motivates a focus on
the more distant sample in the HLTDS.
Credit: D. Rubin.

In addition to the intermediate redshift sample, a more nearby
(z < 0.1 sample is also required to anchor the cosmological analysis.
The Rubin Deep Drilling Fields do not cover enough sky area to
produce this sample50 , and thus another source is necessary.
SN Ia cosmology analysis will also rely on several ground-based
telescopes with multi-object spectroscopic capabilities to measure
host galaxy redshifts, for example, 4MOST in the south and Subaru
PFS in the north. Subaru, in particular, is allocating 100 nights of
observing specifically to enhance Roman’s Core Community Surveys.
It would be highly beneficial for a significant fraction of those
nights to be spent observing HLTDS fields.

Slew Requirements
The decision to split the HLTDS survey area into Northern and
Southern fields has a number of advantages: it ensures that at least
some area will be visible to ground-based observers year-round, it
enables utilization of both Rubin and Subaru data, and it provides
a natural division of sources for consistency checks. At the same
time, it obviously increases required slew times, which have not fully
factored into our survey observing allocations.
We note that the Northern and Southern fields can be treated
largely independently from a scheduling perspective, and there is
no reason that they must always be observed in sequence (and thus
incur a very large slew penalty to get from one area to the other). At

50

The Wide Fast Deep component will
likely cover sufficient area, though the
cadence is not optimal for cosmological
applications.

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

29

the same time, there is also no guarantee that other fields observed
during the HLTDS-CC (e.g., High-Latitude Wide Area Survey and
General Astrophysics Survey fields) will be located (and schedulable)
in between Northern and Southern HLTDS-CC visits, and so this
long slew may at times be inevitable.
Meshing the three Core Community Surveys into a single observing program for Roman is the responsibility of the Roman Observations Time Allocation Committee (ROTAC). Should the ROTAC be
required to modify our recommended HLTDS survey strategy as a
result of these considerations, we offer the following input:
• Executing the Northern and Southern components in series rather
than in parallel51 would have a significant negative impact on the
SN cosmology analysis. Given the long evolution time scale, particularly for the highest redshift events, many more SNe would not
have their full light curves captured (i.e., lost to survey “edges”),
and thus would be unusable for cosmological analysis. Our committee would strongly discourage this option.

51

In other words doing the Northern
fields for 1 year (but doubling the
area) and then the Southern fields for a
second year).

• In particular for the Deep Imaging Tier, the strategy to interlace
visits with a cadence of five days could be dropped, and the entire
filter set could be imaged every 10 days. This would have minimal
impact on the SN cosmology analysis, but would significantly
harm several of the more general transient science cases (e.g.,
things that evolve on short time scales like kilonovae). Similarly,
the cadence of the Deep Spectroscopy Tier could be increased to
10 d (with the exposure time per visit doubled to maintain the
same sensitivity). While also possible for the Wide Imaging and
Spectroscopy Tiers, the scientific loss would be larger due to the
shorter evolution time of these (lower-redshift) sources.
• The areas of different Tiers could be reduced (while maintaining
the North / South split). Assessing the impact of this modification
on cosmology results would require simulations.

Technical Checkpoints from Pilot Survey
As discussed previously, the Pilot Component (HLTDS-PC) was
designed to test as many of the assumptions underlying our survey
recommendations as possible. Specifically we flag the following as
critical:
• The rate of high-z SNe Ia: The DETF FoM depends sensitively
on the number of SNe Ia discovered at large redshifts, and there
is significant uncertainty in this value currently52 . The HTLDSPC will allow verification of this value, in a manner such that the

52

Louis-Gregory Strolger et al. Delay
Time Distributions of Type Ia Supernovae from Galaxy and Cosmic Star
Formation Histories. ApJ, 890(2):140,
February 2020. doi: 10.3847/15384357/ab6a97

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

HLTDS-CC could be modified if necessary (e.g., more area in Deep
Imaging Tier).
• Dithering strategy: Experience with similar H2RG detectors on
JWST indicates that cosmic rays impact a significant number of
pixels in each image. Rejecting these to identify bona fide transients will be challenging in single visits absent dithering. The
HLTDS-PC can test out the viability of this approach, and if
needed spatial dithers could be added to some of the longer exposures in each visit (at the expense of area).
• Prism data at multiple roll angles: These HLTDS-PC observations
will enable testing of host-galaxy subtraction and/or forward
modeling software to extract SN spectra. If these techniques are
found to be unsuccessful, the fraction of time spent in the Spectroscopy Tiers could be reduced or eliminated altogether.
• Data reduction and analysis pipelines: The HLTDS-PC data can
be used to test the entire suite of data reduction and analysis
pipelines, ensuring that these products are ready on Day 1 of the
HTLDS-CC.

Conclusions
The High-Latitude Time-Domain Survey – one of three core community surveys executed during the prime operations phase of Roman
– will be transformative for multiple areas of time-domain science.
The implementation described here enables Roman to achieve its
compelling cosmology requirements with a large sample of SNe Ia
extending out to z > 2, while also enabling a broad range of general
astrophysics. Coupled with powerful time-domain facilities across
the electromagnetic spectrum (e.g., Rubin in the optical, UVEX and
ULTRASAT in the UV, and the Square Kilometer Array in the radio),
we truly are on the cusp of a golden age of time-domain exploration.

Acknowledgments
The committee wishes to thank the following teams for the excellent support received throughout this process: the Roman Alerts
Promptly from Image Differencing (RAPID) Project Infrastructure
Team, the Supernova Project Infrastructure Team (in particular R.
Kessler, D. Rubin, and Rob Knop), and the Roman Project Team at
STScI (in particular W. Schultz, S. Hoffman, O. Fox, K. Gilbert, and K.
McQuinn), GSFC (in particular J. McEnery and J. Kruk), and IPAC (in
particular L. Armus and J. Colbert). Without their dedicated efforts

30

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

this report – and thus the science it enables for the broader community – would not have been possible.

31

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

References
Andreas Albrecht et al. Report of the Dark Energy Task Force. arXiv
e-prints (astro-ph/0609591), September 2006.
Igor Andreoni et al. Enabling kilonova science with Nancy Grace
Roman Space Telescope. Astroparticle Physics, 155:102904, February
2024. doi: 10.1016/j.astropartphys.2023.102904.
K. Boone et al. The Twins Embedding of Type Ia Supernovae. II.
Improving Cosmological Distance Estimates. ApJ, 912(1):71, May
2021a. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abec3b.
K. Boone et al. The Twins Embedding of Type Ia Supernovae. I. The
Diversity of Spectra at Maximum Light. ApJ, 912(1):70, May 2021b.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abec3c.
H. K. Fakhouri et al. Improving Cosmological Distance Measurements Using Twin Type Ia Supernovae. ApJ, 815(1):58, December
2015. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/815/1/58.
Ryan J. Foley et al. Significant luminosity differences of two twin
Type Ia supernovae. MNRAS, 491(4):5991–5999, February 2020. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz3324.
R. Hounsell et al. Simulations of the WFIRST Supernova Survey and
Forecasts of Cosmological Constraints. ApJ, 867(1):23, November
2018. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac08b.
W. D. Kenworthy et al. SALT3: An Improved Type Ia Supernova
Model for Measuring Cosmic Distances. ApJL, 923(2):265, December
2021. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac30d8.
Richard Kessler et al. SNANA: A Public Software Package for
Supernova Analysis. PASP, 121(883):1028, September 2009. doi:
10.1086/605984.
R. Kondapally et al. The LOFAR Two-meter Sky Survey: Deep
Fields Data Release 1. III. Host-galaxy identifications and value
added catalogues. A&A, 648:A3, April 2021. doi: 10.1051/00046361/202038813.
Yukei S. Murakami et al. Leveraging SN Ia spectroscopic similarity
to improve the measurement of H 0 . JCAP, 2023(11):046, November
2023. doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2023/11/046.
Seb Oliver et al. The European Large Area ISO Survey - I. Goals,
definition and observations. MNRAS, 316(4):749–767, August 2000.
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03550.x.

32

findings of the roman high-latitude time-domain survey definition committee

S. Perlmutter et al. Measurements of Ω and Λ from 42 HighRedshift Supernovae. ApJ, 517(2):565–586, June 1999. doi:
10.1086/307221.
M. M. Phillips. The Absolute Magnitudes of Type IA Supernovae.
ApJL, 413:L105, August 1993. doi: 10.1086/186970.
Adam G. Riess et al. Observational Evidence from Supernovae for
an Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological Constant. AJ, 116(3):
1009–1038, September 1998. doi: 10.1086/300499.
B. M. Rose et al. A Reference Survey for Supernova Cosmology
with the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. arXiv e-prints, art.
arXiv:2111.03081, November 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2111.03081.
David Rubin et al. Evaluating and Optimizing a Slitless Prism for
Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope SN Cosmology. arXiv e-prints
(astro-ph/2206.10632), June 2022.
Louis-Gregory Strolger et al. Delay Time Distributions of Type Ia
Supernovae from Galaxy and Cosmic Star Formation Histories. ApJ,
890(2):140, February 2020. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6a97.
V. Ashley Villar et al. SuperRAENN: A Semisupervised Supernova Photometric Classification Pipeline Trained on Pan-STARRS1
Medium-Deep Survey Supernovae. ApJ, 905(2):94, December 2020.
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc6fd.
Yun Wang. Figure of merit for dark energy constraints from current observational data. PRD, 77(12):123525, June 2008. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevD.77.123525.

33

– 102 –
C.3.

Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey

Roman Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey
Definition Committee Report
December 16, 2024
Committee Members:
Jessie Christiansen, Caltech/IPAC (Co-Chair)
Daniel Huber, University of Hawai‘i & University of Sydney (Co-Chair)
Susan Benecchi, PSI
Annalisa Calamida, STScI
Jessica Lu, UC Berkeley
Eduardo Martin, ESA
Benjamin Montet, UNSW
Kris Pardo, USC
Matthew Penny, LSU
Rosemary Pike, SSP/Minor Planet Center
Hans Walter Rix, MPIA
Jennifer Sobeck, Caltech/IPAC
Additional Contributors:
Macy Huston, UCB
Natasha Abrams, UCB
Jonas Klüter, LSU
Farzaneh Zohrabi, LSU
Alison Crisp, OSU
Trevor Weiss, CSULB
Noah Downing, OSU

1

Executive Summary
The Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS) is one of three core community surveys (CCS) to be
executed by the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. The primary science driver for the Roman GBTDS,
and high priority goal for the field, as captured in the Astro2010 Decadal Report1 is the demographics of
cold exoplanets. This science will be enabled by obtaining high cadence (∼15 minute), high precision time
series photometry using Roman’s Wide Field Instrument (WFI) over a nominal ∼2-square degree field of
view towards the Galactic bulge, in order to observe microlensing events caused by both bound and freefloating planets. The survey will have a total duration of ∼400 days spread over the 5-year prime mission.
In addition to exoplanet microlensing, the Roman GBTDS will open up a wide array of science opportunities across astrophysics. The GBTDS definition committee was charged with defining observational
strategies for the GBTDS that maximize the science that can be achieved with the survey, and that represents
the interests of the full astronomical community. Committee deliberations were based on community input
received through short science pitches and longer, more technical white papers, as well as direct interactions
with the community at both in-person and online meetings conducted from January to November 2024.
Based on community input, and a comprehensive suite of simulations, the committee makes the following recommendations to the ROTAC to enable a strong exoplanet microlensing GBTDS that is maximally
useful to a broad section of the astrophysics community for the underguide (380 days), nominal (420 days),
and overguide (440 days) scenarios:
(1) We recommend high-cadence (12–15 minute), broadband (F 146) observations of 5–7 fields in the
Galactic bulge. We recommend fields in the southern bulge, with locations chosen to balance the
expected microlensing rate (increasing towards the Galactic plane) and the lowest extinction rate (decreasing away from the Galactic plane). Of the expected 10 available bulge seasons, we recommend
that six seasons be observed at this high cadence, and we further recommend that they be the first three
and last three available seasons. We recommend that the total observing time allocated to each season
within each of the three scenarios (63, 68.5, and 70.5 days respectively, with precise numbers to be
confirmed by APT calculations) be scheduled to cover the maximum expected visibility of the bulge
(assumed in this report to be 72 days). In addition to the broadband observations, we recommend
observations in two additional filters once every 6 hours, spaced from each other by 3 hours, resulting
in one additional filter measurement every 3 hours. The final filter recommendation will come from
current studies that are not yet complete—we recommend that the ROTAC accept input on the final
filter choice when it is available. In terms of survey timing, if the bulge season is visible at the end of
commissioning, we recommend to commence GBTDS observations if more than eight days remain
within a bulge season. If prime mission operations are extended beyond five years, we recommend
pushing observations for the last bulge season to the end of the prime mission
(2) For all three scenarios, we recommend inclusion of a Galactic center field, covering SgrA* as well
as the Arches, Quintuplet and Young Nuclear Cluster. For the nominal and overguide scenarios,
we recommend that the Galactic center field be observed at the same cadence as the microlensing
fields. For the underguide scenario, we recommend a slower (12-hourly) cadence. In all scenarios we
recommend field layouts that preserve an overall cadence of 15 minutes or less.
(3) For the nominal and overguide scenarios, we recommend low-cadence observations (approximately
every 3–5 days) of all GBTDS survey fields during the Galactic bulge seasons when no high-cadence
observations are obtained.
1

New Worlds, New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=
12951

2

(4) For all three scenarios, we recommend snapshot observations of all survey fields using the five WFI
science filters that are not used as part of the high-cadence or low-cadence seasons.
(5) For all three scenarios, we recommend snapshot observations of all survey fields with the WFI grism
instrument.
These recommendations will enable a wide range of science applications beyond the baseline science
requirements, including unprecedented studies of stellar populations in the center of our Galaxy, the first
constraints on the demographics of stars and exoplanets in the Galactic bulge through asteroseismology and
transits, and detailed studies of compact objects and high-energy X-ray binaries.
We recommend the use of multi-accumulation (MA) readouts that enable maximum flexibility to preserve photometry on saturated stars, which is critical for variability studies of red giants, and non-even
resultants, which are important for studies of fast phenomena such as stellar flares. In addition, we note that
the observing cadence should be ensured to be slightly non-uniform to allow the unambiguous identification
of very short period binaries. Finally, we recommend that the Roman project pursues synergistic observations with other surveys, specifically Euclid, Rubin and Subaru, to maximize the amount of science resulting
from GBTDS observations.
Finally, the committee recommends technical checkpoints after the collection of the first bulge season
data. These checkpoints include photometric performance and quality of grism spectra in highly crowded
fields, as well as regular re-verification of progress towards meeting the baseline science requirements.
These checkpoints should be used to inform possible small changes to the survey strategy that will optimize
various science cases.

3

Contents
1 Science Motivation
1.1 Introduction and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Science Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Summary of White Papers, Science Pitches, and other Community Feedback .
1.3.1 Stellar-Mass Black Holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.2 The Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.3 Stellar physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.4 Compact Objects and Cataclysmic Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.5 Exoplanets: Microlensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.6 Exoplanets: Transiting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.7 Gravitational Waves and Counterparts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.8 Survey Synergies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

6
6
6
7
7
9
9
11
12
14
15
16

2 GBTDS Definition Committee Process
2.1 Charge to the Committee . . . . .
2.2 Survey time allocations . . . . . .
2.3 Committee Membership . . . . .
2.4 Review Process . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

16
16
17
17
17

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

3 Discussion of Results
3.1 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Trade Studies & Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.1 Number of Survey Fields, Exposure Time and Cadence . . . . . .
3.2.2 Exoplanet Microlensing Yields & Meeting Science Requirements
3.2.3 Microlensing Yield Margins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.4 Survey Time Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Recommended Survey Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.1 High-cadence Microlensing Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.2 Adding a field at the Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.3 Maximize color cadence in two filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.4 Maximize Season Cadence & Duration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.5 Low-cadence Seasons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.6 Snapshot Observations: Multicolor Photometry . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.7 Snapshot Observations: Grism Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Strategies Considered but not Recommended . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.1 Globular Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.2 Very High-Cadence Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.3 Earth Transit Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 Other Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

18
18
20
20
21
23
23
23
23
24
25
26
26
28
29
30
30
32
33
34

4 Technical implementation
4.1 Overview of Survey Components
4.2 Nominal Survey [420 days] . . .
4.3 Underguide Survey [380 days] .
4.4 Overguide Survey [440 days] . .

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

34
34
35
35
35

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

4

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

5 Constraints and Considerations
5.1 Scheduling constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Location of specific fields . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Sensitivity to start and end of science operations
5.4 Ancillary data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.5 Spectroscopic Guiding . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.6 Pre-survey requirements . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

36
36
39
39
39
40
40

6 Technical checkpoints from early survey data analysis
40
6.1 Photometric precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.2 Spectroscopic guiding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.3 Baseline science requirement verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A White papers and science pitches submitted to the GBTDS
B Microlensing Exoplanet Yield Simulations
B.1 Simulation outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.2 Optimizing number of fields, location, cadence, and exposure time
B.3 Bound Planets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.4 Comparison to previous Roman predictions . . . . . . . . . . . .
C Synergies with HST and JWST observations

42
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

46
46
48
56
56
59

5

1

Science Motivation

1.1

Introduction and Terminology

The Roman Space Telescope is designed to address fundamental questions in the areas of dark energy,
exoplanets, and infrared astrophysics (Spergel et al., 2013). Roman is equipped with a 2.4-m aperture
telescope and two instruments: a coronograph and a wide-field instrument (WFI). Roman’s WFI covers
a field of 45′ x23′ (0.28 square degrees) with 0.11′′ pixels. Eight science filters cover a wavelength range
of 0.48–2.3µm, as well as two dispersive elements for slitless spectroscopy: a prism (R=100) and grism
(R=600).
The Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey (GBTDS) is one of three core community surveys that will
be conducted with the Roman WFI over the 5 year prime mission. The primary science driver is the study
of the demographics of cold exoplanets by observing microlensing events caused by both bound and freefloating planets (e.g. Penny et al., 2019). This will be enabled by obtaining high cadence (<15 minute), high
precision time series photometry over a ≈2 square degree field of view in the Galactic bulge.
This report describes recommendations for the definition of the Roman GBTDS. Key terminology that
will be used for the remainder of the report are as follows:
• Survey refers to the total amount of time over Roman’s prime mission that will be spent on the GBTDS.
The nominal survey duration is 420 days (≈ 20% of the total mission).
• Season refers to the time during a year in which the Galactic bulge is observable by Roman. The
maximum season duration is 72 days, set by spacecraft pointing limits, and the maximum number of
seasons is 10, set by nominal mission lifetime of 5 years (the bulge is observable twice a year).
• Field refers to a single WFI pointing, covering approximately 0.28 square degrees. Roman will observe multiple fields consecutively over each season.
Recommendations from the committee are found in blue boxes throughout the report, the first time
they appear.

1.2

Science Requirements

The Roman GBTDS must be defined in such a way as to fulfill the baseline science requirements of the
exoplanet microlensing survey. These requirements are laid out in the Roman Space Telescope Science
Requirements Document (RST-SYS-REQ-0020, Revision D):
• EML 2.0.1: Roman shall be capable of measuring the mass function of exoplanets with masses in the
range 1M⊕ < m < 30MJup and orbital semi-major axes ≥ 1 AU to better than 15% per decade in
mass.
• EML 2.0.2: Roman shall be capable of measuring the frequency of bound exoplanets with masses in
the range 0.1M⊕ < m < 0.3M⊕ to better than 25%.
• EML 2.0.3: Roman shall be capable of determining the masses of, and distances to, host stars of 40%
of the detected planets with a precision of 20% or better.
• EML 2.0.4: Roman shall be capable of measuring the frequency of free floating planetary-mass objects in the Galaxy from Mars to 10 Jupiter masses. If there is one M⊕ free-floating planet per star,
measure this frequency to better than 25%.
• EML 2.0.5: Roman shall be capable of estimating η⊕ (defined as the frequency of planets orbiting
FGK stars with mass ratio and estimated projected semimajor axis within 20% of the Earth-Sun system) to a precision of 0.2 dex via extrapolation from larger and longer-period planets.
6

Beyond the exoplanet microlensing survey, a high precision, high cadence, wide field-of-view photometric survey of the Galactic bulge has the potential to yield significant additional science across a variety
of fields (see Section 1.3). The ideal GBTDS will achieve the exoplanet microlensing science requirements
while also maximizing the utility of the survey data for other science cases. The GBTDS definition committee (see Section 2) was assembled to recommend a range of potential survey designs that could fulfill these
needs.

1.3

Summary of White Papers, Science Pitches, and other Community Feedback

In order to explore the full breadth of science investigations possible with the Roman CCSs, as well as to
understand at a high level what aspects of the survey design were most important for these investigations,
feedback was invited from a broad cross-section of the community. Initially, short (one-to-two paragraph)
‘science pitches’ were solicited from the community, due February 17, 2023. There were 43 science pitches
submitted to the GBTDS, spanning science from exomoons to quasars. This was followed by a call for
longer, more technically-focused white papers, due June 16, 2023. These white papers included quantitative
discussions of potential observation strategies, addressing what strategies would enable a given science
investigation, and the impact of different survey design choices on the proposed science. Eleven of the
previous science pitches were expanded into full white papers, and an additional eleven white papers were
submitted, for a total of 22 white papers relevant to the GBTDS. The science themes in these submissions
are summarized below, and relevant white papers (WPs) and science pitches (SPs) are listed in Appendix A.
1.3.1 Stellar-Mass Black Holes
When massive stars die, they collapse under their own gravity and, theoretically, form stellar-mass black
holes (BHs). However, the exact mapping between a star’s initial mass and its remnant mass and type (black
hole, or neutron star, or nothing) are extremely uncertain as highlighted by the unexpectedly low and high
masses of BHs found via gravitational waves (GWs; Abbott et al., 2021). As a result, the number, mass
function, velocity distribution, and binary fraction of BHs are largely unknown. While the plethora of GW
detections of >100 binary BHs has provided a mass function, the unknown relationship between tight binary
BHs and the majority of BHs thought to be in singles largely limits our ability to use GW BHs to understand
massive star and compact object evolution (Heger et al., 2023; Marchant & Bodensteiner, 2024). Thus it is
critical to measure the population-level properties of both single and binary BHs in order to understand the
highly uncertain physics of massive-star death, such as implosion and explosion mechanisms, natal kicks,
and the effects of binary interactions. The Roman GBTDS will probe stellar mass black holes through the
following methods:
WP06, WP23 – Black Hole Microlensing: Gravitational microlensing is a powerful technique to find and
characterize large samples of both isolated and binary BHs in the Milky Way. The Milky Way is predicted
to contain 107 –109 BHs with >80% living in isolation (Agol & Kamionkowski, 2002); note that this number
remains uncertain at the order-of-magnitude level. When one of these BHs crosses in front of a background
star, it causes both a temporary brightening in photometry and an astrometric wobble or excursion due to
gravitational lensing. Detection of both the photometric and astrometric signals allows us to measure the
mass and luminosity of the lens and definitively determine if it is a black hole. This has recently been
demonstrated with the first detection of an isolated black hole via gravitational lensing (Lam et al., 2022;
Sahu et al., 2022). Toward the Galactic bulge and at Roman depth, the number of such events is expected to
be > 100 in the Roman GBTDS (Figure 1, Lam et al., 2020). The timescale of these events, known as the
Einstein crossing time (tE ), peaks at ∼80 days for isolated black holes and > 150days for BHs in binaries.
The photometric signal lasts 2–3 tE with brightness changes exceeding 0.1 mag, and the astrometric signal
lasts 8–10 tE and has a maximum deviation of ∼1 mas.
A sample of >100 BHs is needed with <25% mass uncertainties in order to constrain the BH mass
function, binary fraction, and kick velocity distribution. To detect and characterize such a large sample with
7

Figure 1: The Roman GBTDS will allow unprecedented insights into isolated stellar-mass black holes and stellar
populations in the Galactic center. Left, from Lam et al. (2020): Maximum astrometric shift versus Einstein crossing
time for simulated Roman microlensing events. Colors show different populations of lenses, including in black holes
(black). The dashed line shows the ≈ 5-day, 1-σ stacked astrometric precision of Roman. Events with ≈ 3-σ detectable
astrometric lensing signals are shown above the solid line, which includes most black holes and a large sample of
neutron stars. Right, adapted from Terry et al. (2023): Stellar density as a function of distance from the galactic center.
NSC and SD denote to the nuclear star cluster and nuclear stellar disk. The inset shows the Roman footprint in the
Galactic center.

Roman, it is critical to have precise photometry and astrometry over long timescales. The white papers
recommend that the sample of black holes can be significantly increased and mass measurements improved
by including low-cadence (e.g. 1 measurement from 4 images every 3–10 days) observations during the
Roman bulge seasons not filled by high-cadence observations.
Ideally, gap-filling observations from the ground from Rubin2 or PRIME3 would also be conducted
between Roman seasons. Finally, the most massive black holes likely sink towards the Galactic Plane and
Center due to dynamical friction; thus fields at low Galactic latitudes or at the Galactic Center may yield a
higher BH lensing event rate. However, this depends sensitively on the kick velocity BHs receive at stellar
death and the metallicity dependence of the initial-final mass relation. Thus, a range of Galactic latitudes
may provide interesting constraints to BH populations.
Binary BH Astrometric Wobble: Astrometric wobbles are an ideal way to detect black holes in binary systems, even when they are not accreting mass from a companion star. The population of binary black holes
allows us to probe the late stages of massive star evolution, binary system mass-exchange, and explosion
and kick mechanisms through measurements of BH+star binary mass ratios, semi-major axes, and system
velocities (Gandhi et al., 2023). Gaia has already detected at least two such systems, showing the power
of the astrometric wobble technique (El-Badry et al., 2023a,b). The properties of these systems cannot be
explained by a coherent theory of binary evolution and explosion mechanisms. Thus, it is critical to increase
the sample of binary BHs.
Roman can achieve astrometric precisions of <0.1 mas for daily stacks and 0.04 mas for weekly stacks
(WFIRST Astrometry Working Group et al., 2019). Binary systems containing a BH + star with a semimajor axis of 1 AU display a detectable astrometric wobble of 0.125 mas at Galactic Center distances (8 kpc).
To fully characterize the orbital parameters and system mass, full orbital phase coverage is required. Sys2
3

https://www.lsst.org/scientists/survey-design
http://www-ir.ess.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp/prime/about/project.html

8

tems with a BH mass of 5 M⊙ (20 M⊙ ) have a period of 163 days (81 days); thus low-cadence gap filling
observations in all Roman bulge seasons without high-cadence observations would be useful. Such observations would also provide measurements of the system parallax; knowing the source distance is critical to
convert the observed angular semi-major axis to a physical separation.
1.3.2 The Galactic Center
Placing one of the GBTDS fields onto the Galactic center (GC) would enable a large range of science cases
including exoplanets, stellar and compact object populations, Galactic structure, and supermassive black
hole physics. The key argument for this field is the observationally-supported anticipation that the stellar
and compact object populations in this field are unlike anywhere else in the Galaxy. A few key science cases
enabled by adding a Galactic center field to the GBTDS are detailed below. A more complete, but brief, list
is then presented.
WP16 – Star-Compact Object Binary Systems: The survey would provide a census of star-compact object
binary systems, with a focus on short-period systems, where ellipsoidal variations (and Doppler boost)
provide powerful photometric signatures. In the Nuclear Star Cluster alone, model predictions suggest
about 250 such systems.
WP04 – Microlensing Events: The advantage of the Galactic center field for microlensing is the enormous
(column and spatial) density of sources in this unique direction. This advantage is, of course, dampened by
the enormous reddening and stellar crowding in these directions. The key is again that the stellar populations,
and perhaps even more so the stellar remnant population, at the very bottom of the Galactic potential well
may be unique: ∼ 35 – 75 isolated black holes and neutron stars might be found, providing crucial data
on the mass and velocity function of compact objects in this unique environment. Additionally, should
intermediate mass black holes exist, the Galactic center region is one of the most likely places to find them.
WP04 – Nuclear Star Cluster and Nuclear Stellar Disk: The combination of proper motion precision and
area coverage of this field would be an order of magnitude better than existing surveys (Figure 1, right
panel). This should provide critical clues to the formation mechanisms and evolution of the nuclear star
cluster and the nuclear stellar disk. The survey would provide at least 50% azimuthal coverage well into the
nuclear stellar disk.
WP04 – Young Star Clusters: The survey could detect and characterize the tidal tails of massive young clusters like the Arches and Quintuplet clusters, testing models of cluster evolution near the GC and helping
resolve the apparent deficit of young clusters relative to the recent star formation history.
WP02 – Monitoring SgrA*: Regular monitoring would track accretion events and near-IR flares from the
central supermassive black hole, which can vary in brightness by a factor of 100 or more on hour-long
timescales, providing insights into the physics of low-luminosity galactic nuclei.
Other Cases: Additional science cases enabled by a Galactic center field include measurement of the Galactic
latitude dependence of exoplanets detected via microlensing and transit methods; a search for optical and
infrared counterparts to X-ray transients such as cataclysmic variables (CVs) and low or high-mass X-ray
binaries (see Section 1.3.4); probing properties of dust and the extinction law in different environments;
mapping the distribution of young stars and star clusters to understand why the star formation efficiency is
so low in the Galactic center region compared with the rest of the Galactic Disk; study the internal structure
of the central molecular zone and search for intermediate mass black holes through signs of accretion or
dynamical influence on surrounding stars.
1.3.3 Stellar physics
The continuous, high-precision time series observations of the GBTDS will open up a wide array of science
investigations in stellar astrophysics. Specific science cases include:
9

Figure 2: The Roman GBTDS will allow the first systematic application of asteroseismology to study stellar populations in the galactic bulge. Distances of red giants with detected solar-like oscillations from space-based telescopes,
showing the asteroseismic red giant yield from CoRoT (≈ 2000 stars), Kepler (≈ 16000 stars), K2 (≈ 20000 stars),
TESS (≈ 160,000 stars) [20] and the expected yield from the Roman GBTDS assuming photometric noise performance from (Gould et al., 2015). From Huber et al. (2023).

WP01 – Asteroseismology of Bulge Red Giants: Oscillations in red giant stars are a powerful tool for studying stellar populations. This is because red giants oscillate with ≳ 0.1 mmag amplitudes and periods of hours
to days, allowing detections with moderate cadence and photometric precision out to large distances. Global
frequency properties can be used to infer masses, ages, and evolutionary states for large numbers of giants
(Pinsonneault et al., 2014). However, asteroseismology has so far sampled only a limited portion of the
Galaxy. The seminal Kepler field is relatively nearby, and the observed red giants had a complex selection
function (Sharma et al., 2016). The K2 mission covered populations along the ecliptic plane, but with a
relatively modest total sample size and depth (Stello et al., 2017; Zinn et al., 2020). TESS provides an
all-sky survey that is large but shallow (Hon et al., 2021) due to the small aperture. The Roman GBTDS
will expand asteroseismology to the distant stellar populations of the galactic bulge for the first time, with
an expected yield of hundreds of thousands of red giants (Figure 2. The bulge harbors a unique population
born with high star formation efficiency in the earliest phases of Galactic evolution (Rix et al., 2022). Much
of what we do not know about the formation of the Milky Way stems from our current inability to probe
stellar populations in the inner Galaxy, which harbors a non axisymmetric bar whose chemodynamical evolution is complicated and poorly understood. Exploring how the structure, kinematics and chemistry of the
inner Galaxy depends on age offers a way to unlock its formation history. The bulge is also the closest
analog to the spheroidal populations of other disk galaxies and entire elliptical galaxies, and thus will aid in
understanding star formation in high-redshift galaxies currently studied with JWST. The GBTDS provides
the first opportunity to apply the powerful tool of asteroseismology to measure masses and ages of stellar
populations in the galactic bulge.
Challenges for the detection of oscillations with Roman include performing photometry on saturated
stars, since many red giants in the bulge will saturate after a single read. The white paper argues that a
precision of 1 mmag per 15-min cadence or better is required to detect oscillations in the populous red clump
stars, and faster observing cadence would help mitigate the risk of not reaching this precision requirement.
WP05, WP19 – Asteroseismology of globular clusters: Galactic globular clusters (GGCs) are among the
oldest stellar systems in the Universe, and a full understanding of their origin will inform us on our Galaxy
and similar galaxies formation history. Roman provides a unique opportunity to exploit asteroseismology
10

to better characterize the properties of GGCs, in particular those located in the Galactic bulge. For instance,
astroseismology of a GGC would enable us to constrain low-mass star parameters, verify and improve stellar
evolutionary models, and derive accurate stellar ages. A few potential clusters are available, such as the pair
NGC 6522 and NGC 6528, which are about 1.5 degree away from the nominal microlensing fields. These
clusters would fit in a single Roman field, enabling the asteroseismic analysis of two GGCs at different
metallicities at the same time. The Roman Space Telescope is the only mission that will allow to perform
asteroseismology of red giant stars in the Galactic bulge in the near future; Kepler observed the closest GGC,
M 4, and disclosed the presence of many new variables and new low-amplitude modes in its RR Lyrae stars.
Future planned missions do not have the necessary sensitivity and spatial resolution to perform these studies
in farther away GGCs and, in particular, in bulge clusters affected by reddening.
WP15, SP9 – Stellar flares: Flares are sudden releases of magnetic energy on the surfaces of stars that occur
on timescales of minutes, typically characterized by a steep flux increase followed by exponential decay.
Understanding the frequency, duration, and energy distributions of flares for stars across the H-R diagram
has wide ranging implications in astrophysics, including the magnetic activity evolution of stars, the habitability of exoplanets, and high-energy space weather events on our own Sun that can affect the Earth. The
GBTDS will allow several unique insights for studying stellar flares. For example, Roman will constrain
flare rates in stellar populations well outside the solar neighborhood for the first time, probing populations
of stars that are older and span a much broader range of stellar metallicities than stars in the solar neighborhood. The long time baseline combined with the large number of monitored stars in the GBTDS provide the
ideal testing ground for probing the flare rates of such old stars. Second, the short effective exposure time
will enable high-cadence, non-uniform sampling through different resultant strategies, allowing the study if
flare phenomena on very short (∼second) timescales.
Other science cases enabled by the GBTDS without specific requirements include the study of eclipsing
binary stars (SP7), constraining the initial mass function (SP32), white dwarf binaries (SP34), asteroseismology of lensed stars (SP39), blue large-amplitude pulsators (SP41), RR Lyrae stars (SP42) and long
period variables (SP43).
1.3.4 Compact Objects and Cataclysmic Variables
Compact objects include the three possible remnants at the end of a stellar life, namely black holes, neutron
stars and white dwarfs. When compact objects are in binaries, they produce an array of time-dependent
phenomena that Roman can investigate with unprecedented combination of high astrometric and photometric precision, observing baseline, and spatial resolution. Potential compact object science drivers for the
GTBDS are described below.
WP02 – X-ray binaries, cataclysmic variables & transits in the Galactic bulge: Roman’s high precision, high
cadence photometry can be used to detect time-variability associated with compact objects down to unprecedented low luminosity. It is plausible that the GBTDS could explore a new regime of low mass accretion
rate that could be critical for understanding the evolution of binaries with compact objects, as well as the
demographics of such systems. Adding a field at the Galactic center, overlapping with the Chandra and
Swift observations of the same region, would enable multiwavelength studies of these objects across a wide
range of the electromagnetic spectrum.
WP13 – Faint cataclysmic variables in the Galactic bulge: The GBTDS could constrain the properties of the
Galactic Diffuse X-ray Emission (GDXE); in particular to determine if there is a truly diffuse component,
or if it can all be resolved into discrete sources, i.e. CVs. The GBTDS will enable the observations of CVs
previously identified in X-ray emission by Chandra in the near-infrared regime and at high cadence. The
time series photometry will help constrain their orbital properties, in particular of the short-period CVs. With
these data, the GBTDS would then contribute to a better understanding of the components of the GDXE and
11

to characterize dwarf novae and CVs, possible progenitors of type Ia Supernovae and gravitational wave
emitters respectively.
WP16 – New compact object binary populations with precision astrometry: The high-precision astrometry
expected to be enabled by Roman at infrared wavelengths could prove much more effective than Gaia at
revealing many new binaries with compact objects via astrometric wobble. These binaries could be in
a quiet phase with no high-energy emission from active accretion and thus have remained undetected by
Chandra and Swift. Increasing the time baseline over which astrometric studies will be made with Roman
is required for this science case to detect longer period binaries with astrometry.
1.3.5 Exoplanets: Microlensing
Measuring the demographics of exoplanet systems has been one of the major driving goals of exoplanet
research for decades. This began with the work of radial velocity surveys which discovered hot Jupiters
(Mayor & Queloz, 1995, and following), a new class of planet not seen in the solar system, but showed
they were rare (e.g. Gould et al., 2006). Over time these surveys mapped out the distribution of giant
planets with orbits less than a few AU (Cumming et al., 2008). The field of exoplanet demographics was
transformed by the launch of Kepler, which for the first time enabled relatively uniform coverage of a
large range of both orbital period/semimajor axis and planet radius, providing the first kilo-scale4 exoplanet
demographics sample and painting the first clear picture of the hot and warm planet populations within
∼1 AU of their stars with radii reaching down to that of Earth and below (e.g. Petigura et al., 2013; Burke
et al., 2015). This sample has placed some constraints on the frequency of potentially habitable planets and
revealed information about the physics shaping orbital architectures (e.g. Weiss et al., 2018) and planetary
atmospheres on a population level (e.g Fulton et al., 2017). Long duration radial velocity surveys and
astrometry with Gaia will eventually map the distribution of giant planets out to large semimajor axis, and
direct imaging can provide information on the most distant giant planets. But, to explore the full range of
planet masses at large orbital separations requires gravitational microlensing.
The goal of the GBTDS is to provide a new kilo-scale sample of cold exoplanet demographics to complement and complete that of Kepler. The GBTDS microlensing survey will be sensitive to planets with
masses ≳1 M⊕ with semi-major axes from ∼1 AU outwards, as shown in Figure 3, tying in to Kepler’s
warm planet population and extending demographic sensitivity out to the edges of planetary systems. Over
a smaller range of semi-major axis Roman will be sensitive to, and have a reasonable chance of detecting,
bound planets with masses as low as Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. A key advance that Roman provides over
ground-based microlensing surveys is its ability to partially resolve the lens and source star of the microlensing event with diffraction-limited optics near the start or end of its mission, which will allow measurement
of planet and host star masses in over 40% of planet detections; typically, from the microlensing event alone
one only measures the planet-host mass ratio. As the microlensing effect only requires the objects lensing have mass, it is sensitive to free-floating planets (FFPs) not bound to any star, or planets out in the far
reaches of their planetary systems at distances comparable to Neptune and beyond. The GBTDS is designed
to detect hundreds of examples of these, and should have sensitivity down to the mass of Pluto if such FFPs
exist in large enough numbers (Johnson et al., 2020). Finally, the GBTDS is designed to enable an estimate
of the occurrence rate of Earth-mass planets in the habitable zones of Sun-like stars by extrapolating from
measurements at slightly larger semimajor axis and at slightly larger mass.
Four white papers focused exclusively on exoplanet microlensing or related issues were submitted to the
white paper call, as well as numerous science pitches.
WP09 – The Roman Galactic Exoplanet Survey (RGES): – Cold exoplanet demographics is the principal
remaining area of under-explored exoplanet demographic parameter space; only a mission of Roman’s scale
can complete the demographic census begun by Kepler. The duration of the GBTDS seasons, the span of the
4

a sample with ∼1000 detections

12

Kepler Exoplanets

Other Known Exoplanets

Simulated Roman Exoplanets

Roman Sensitivity − the number of planet detections
expected if there is 1 planet per star at (a, Mp )

10000

10000
1000

100

100

10

10

1
Ro
ma
n

Planet Mass in Earth Masses

1000

er

0.1 Kepl
0.010.01

0.1

1
Semimajor Axis in AU

10

1
100

0.1

Credit: Penny et al. (2019)
ApJS 241, 3

Figure 3: The Roman GBTDS will uncover the demographics of cold, small exoplanets for the first time. Mass
and semimajor axis sensitivity region for Roman’s GBTDS microlensing survey shown by blue shading, compared to
Kepler’s sensitivity region shown in red. Blue points are a simulated realization of a planet population, whereas red
and black points show planets discovered by Kepler and other surveys (Akeson et al., 2013). From Penny et al. (2019).

survey’s baseline, and that its cadence, depth, and area (i.e., the number of stars surveyed) all play important
roles in reaching the survey’s requirements, and there is little room to degrade these.
WP11 – Magnifying NASA Roman GBTDS exoplanet science with coordinated Euclid observations: See Section 1.3.8.
WP21 – The Scientific Discovery Space for the Roman Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey: The GBTDS
has unique discovery space for the smallest bound and free-floating planets and those planets in wide orbits
compared to current ground-based microlensing surveys.
WP03 – Contiguity is Key: The length of the Roman GBTDS seasons should be maximized: The span of each
GBTDS season should be maximized to that allowable by hardware in order to maximize the fraction of microlensing events with key parameters such as their timescale and parallax that could be measured.
WP20 – Galactic Bulge Time Domain Survey: Mass measurement of FFP with source color measurements:
The cadence of the occasional color filter measurements should be increased to maximize the number of
free-floating planet candidate events with color measurements, which can help with measuring the angular
Einstein radius and rejecting false positives.
Other Cases: Science pitches included the following proposals:
• Observing one field at doubled cadence to increase the number of detections of multicomponent systems (i.e., multiple planets, planets in binary systems, etc.).
• Making color measurements in a blue and a red filter to facilitate source color measurements for Mdwarf source stars.
• Searching for independent microlensing events on the same source star
13

• Constraining lens masses and potential hosts of free-floating planets for all of the microlensing events
that have happened before the Roman survey in its fields.
• Searching for exomoons in microlensing events, and leveraging simultaneous observations from other
observatories, e.g., Euclid.
• Using the xallarap effect to detect stellar, brown dwarf, and planetary companions to the source stars
in microlensing events.
The committee also considered feedback presented in white papers submitted to the arXiv during the
committee’s charge. Gould et al. (2024) argued to emphasize higher cadence observations at the cost of sky
coverage and color measurements to enhance the number of detections of Pluto-mass free-floating planets.
Gould (2024) argued that the GBTDS seasons should be more evenly distributed throughout the Roman
mission to improve the yield of black hole-star binaries, at the cost of slightly degrade proper motion measurements.
1.3.6 Exoplanets: Transiting
Microlensing surveys by their nature require regular, repeated, high-precision observations of a large number
of stars in a field in order to detect the rare, fast, and small signals that are caused by the gravitational
microlensing of a small planet passing in front of a distant star. These constraints are also well-matched
to an exoplanet transit survey. Transit signals require a precise geometric alignment, making the signals
intrinsically rare and requiring many stars to be observed to find a statistical sample of transiting planets.
Regular observations are required to find the occasional transit signals and measure planet periods, and
the signals induced by even giant planets require better than 1% photometry. As a result, a well-designed
microlensing survey may expect to find a large number of transiting planets as well. The GBTDS is expected
to detect tens of thousands of transiting planets, an order of magnitude more than the Kepler and TESS
missions (Figure 4, Montet et al., 2017; Wilson et al., 2023).
WP08 – Characterizing Exoplanet Populations: One of the primary benefits of the GBTDS as a transit survey is the large distance to the host stars. While Kepler primarily focused on stars within 1 kpc (Borucki
et al., 2010), the GBTDS will be sensitive to exoplanets across all major components of the Milky Way outside the local stellar neighborhood, with the typical sub-Neptune planet at a distance of about 2–3 kpc. This
population is distinct from the local population, with planet host stars dominated by old, thin disk stars with
an average metallicity of [Fe/H] ≈ 0.18 dex (Eilers et al., 2022). As a result, the GBTDS will enable the
first opportunities to compare the local transiting exoplanet population to that in other environments across
the Galaxy.
To maximize the exoplanet yield in the GBTDS, several recommendations were made. The first was
to reduce the cadence as much as possible, possibly by decreasing the number of fields. This change has
the effect of significantly increasing the detectability of small, distant transiting exoplanets. The second
recommendation was to increase the season duration as much as possible, as this also increases the sensitivity
to small planets. The addition of a field at a galactic latitude near b = −2.4 degrees was recommended to
increase the number of planet candidates from the thick disk. Finally, recommendations were made for small
dithers across repeat observations of fields and low levels of correlated noise in order to enable precise PSF
sampling and consistent systematics removal.
WP19 – Globular clusters: Globular clusters allow probes of planet formation in extreme environments. Two
globular clusters near the Galactic center, NGC 6522 and NGC 6528, have approximately the same age and
mass but metallicity more than one dex different, enabling to test the differing effects of age and abundance
on planet occurrence in crowded stellar environments. Given the history of galactic chemical enrichment,
these two factors are often degenerate. These clusters are only two degrees from the Galactic center and are
near enough to each other to be simultaneously observed with WFI.
14

Figure 4: The Roman GBTDS will detect tens of thousands of transiting exoplanets across a range of sizes and
spectral types, expanding exoplanet demographics to new stellar populations in our galaxy. Histograms of the expected
exoplanet yield as a function of planet size (left), host star spectral type (middle) and stellar population (right). The top
and bottom panel show the yield assuming different assumptions for the metallicity dependence of planet occurrnce.
From Wilson et al. (2023).

WP18 – Earth Transit Zone: Another suggestion was scheduled observations of the Earth Transit Zone, by
including a field along the ecliptic plane in which distant planets would be able to perceive the Earth as a
transiting planet. The nearest such field is approximately five degrees away from the other proposed fields
for the GBTDS, where the Galactic and ecliptic planets intersect. In addition to detecting a large number of
transiting planets that would be of particular interest to future SETI studies, these efforts would also enable
high-resolution extinction mapping near the Galactic center.
WP08, WP22 – Synergies between Transiting Planets and Microlensing Detections: An additional recurring
theme was the complementarity between the detection of transiting planets at large distances and the microlensing planet population to be discovered by the GBTDS. Distant transiting planets will be important for
a robust estimate of η⊕ , the occurrence rate of Earth-like planets. Currently, the best estimate of η⊕ comes
from the Kepler mission (e.g. Bryson et al., 2021; Bergsten et al., 2022). While the GBTDS microlensing
yield will improve our understanding of this value, it may not be directly comparable to the Kepler value
as these probe different stellar populations. By detecting a transiting planet population in the same environment as the microlensing planets, this allows for a more complete characterization of the differences
between these two fields and a truly Galactic η⊕ . In addition, with a large number of planets to be detecting
via microlensing, a few of these planets will themselves be transiting, so if these transits themselves can be
detected more can be learned about these systems and their overall architectures.
1.3.7 Gravitational Waves and Counterparts
Observations of gravitational waves (GW) have allowed us to probe black hole mergers, neutron star collisions, and supermassive black hole populations in a whole new way. Roman will be able to build on recent
momentum in this field by offering two unique capabilities: observations of GWs in the micro-hertz band
with relative astrometry and observations of compact object GW counterparts for the Laser Interferometer
15

Space Antenna (LISA).
WP07 – GWs with Relative Astrometry: Currently, there are no planned experiments capable of probing
the GW micro-hertz frequency regime, where supermassive black holes with masses ≳ 107 M⊙ merge.
Astrometry provides one way to possibly fill this frequency gap (see, e.g., Wang et al., 2021, 2022). When
a GW passes through the Earth, it distorts the trajectories of incoming photons (Book & Flanagan, 2011).
This leads to an apparent motion of stars on the sky, which can be measured via precise relative astrometry.
Roman’s excellent relative astrometry (WFIRST Astrometry Working Group et al., 2019) and the natural
cadence of the GBTDS make Roman a viable GW detector within the micro-hertz frequency band. This
science case relies on as high a cadence as possible to maximize the statistical power of these measurements.
An additional gain in sensitivity could occur if Roman observes only one field and does not interleave fields
each season.
WP10 – GW Counterpart Searches: The Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA), planned for launch
in 2027, is set to observe the millihertz GW band, which will give it sensitivity to intermediate mass black
hole mergers (Amaro-Seoane et al., 2023). However, the dominant sources in LISA’s band are predicted
to be compact binaries with orbital periods less than 1 hour in our Galaxy. These systems serve both as
foregrounds to the IMBH signals, and as interesting physical systems in their own right. They are also
predicted to be bright electromagnetically and concentrated toward the galactic plane and center (Lamberts
et al., 2019). The GBTDS’s focus on the galactic center and high cadence would allow Roman to look
for counterparts to these compact binary GW signals in LISA. In particular, this science case looks to find
eclipsing binaries that could be LISA sources. Given the < 1 hour orbital periods, the eclipses would last
on the order of a couple minutes. This science case thus relies on a higher cadence to the nominal GBTDS
mission, a 1 minute cadence. Currently, only about 50 possible LISA sources are known (Kupfer et al.,
2024). With Roman, it is predicted that we could find 10s of sources with just a few hours of continuous, 1
minute cadence.
1.3.8

Survey Synergies

WP11 – Euclid: ESA’s Euclid mission, with contributions from NASA, is a six-year OIR wide-field imaging
and spectroscopic survey of a third of the sky to probe dark matter and dark energy. There are significant
synergies between Euclid and Roman for the study of exoplanets and exomoons detected by both missions.
Coordinated observations between both space missions could be valuable to Roman for assessing false alarm
rates and improving exoplanet mass measurements.
WP14 – Rubin: The Vera Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) is a 10-year optical
survey that will monitor the Galactic bulge, among other fields. The scientific synergies between Roman
and Rubin include microlensing, transits, stellar parameter analyses, and galactic dynamics, and these could
be maximized if the timing of the high-cadence GBTDS bulge seasons were chosen to allow the LSST
observations to fall in the seasonal gaps.

2
2.1

GBTDS Definition Committee Process
Charge to the Committee

The GBTDS Definition Committee is charged with defining the GBTDS observational strategies in a way
that maximizes the science that can be achieved with the survey, and that represents the interests of the
full astronomical community. The GBTDS definition committee will use community input and a suite of
simulations to:
• Identify the most promising synergies between general astrophysics and the drivers of the science
requirements for the GBTDS;
16

• Determine where additional investigative work is needed (e.g., to define appropriate metrics for a
science investigation or determine if a science investigation is feasible within constraints);
• Discover areas where community consensus-building is needed (e.g., where there are significant discrepancies in strategy for similar science investigations), target additional requests for community
input;
• Inform the programs and agendas for later follow-up community workshops on the GBTDS survey
definition; and
• Compile this report presenting the committee findings and recommendations.

2.2

Survey time allocations

The GBTDS Definition Committee was provided the three scenarios in Table 1 for which to design survey
options.
Survey

Duration [days]

Underguide
Nominal
Overguide

380
420
440

Table 1: GBTDS Survey Time Allocations

2.3

Committee Membership

The committee co-chairs (Jessie Christiansen, Caltech/IPAC) and Daniel Huber (University of Hawai‘i/University
of Sydney) were chosen to span multiple science axes of interest to the GBTDS. The remaining committee
members were chosen to ensure a diversity of expertise and community viewpoints, including some members who were and some members who were not in project infrastructure teams. The broad science themes
of the white papers and science pitches described in Section 1.3 were distilled, and committee members
with relevant expertise were solicited both from a list of self-nominations and from the broader community.
Committee members were solicited in November and December of 2023. Table 2 summarizes the final
membership of the GBTDS committee.

2.4

Review Process

The committee was introduced at the 243rd AAS meeting in January, 2024, and began meeting regularly in
February, with two time slots per week to maximally accommodate the range of time zones. A rubric was
established to assess the white papers and science pitches described in Section 1.3; it is summarized in Table
3. In preparing to review the community input, the committee recognized that some of the white papers and
science pitches may have become out-of-date, and a community call for updates to previously submitted
materials was solicited. Committee members declared conflicts for submissions on which they were a coauthor. Each white paper was assigned a primary and secondary reviewer, although all white papers were
read and graded by all committee members. The primary and secondary reviewers presented summaries
of the white papers and their grades over a four-week period, with 2-4 white papers being discussed per
meeting, 4-6 per week. The committee discussed each white paper, and in a number of cases additional
work was assigned to committee members to clarify requirements or perform requested further analyses.
In addition to the formal science pitches and white papers, the committee provided regular platforms for
updates to and inputs from the community. Members of the committee attended the Roman science conference ‘Challenging Theory with Roman: From Planet Formation to Cosmology’ in July 2024 to report on
the committee’s progress, and held office hours to solicit additional feedback from the community. Further
progress was reported in a virtual Roman Town Hall in August 2024, with additional input received.
17

Name
Voting Members
Jessie Christiansen, Co-Chair
Daniel Huber, Co-Chair
Susan Bennechi
Annalisa Calamida
Jessica Lu
Eduardo Martin
Benjamin Montet
Kris Pardo
Matthew Penny
Rosemary Pike
Hans-Walter Rix
Jennifer Sobeck
Ex-Officio Members
Ori Fox
Karoline Gilbert
Max Mutchler
Cristina Oliveira
Richard Cosentino
Lee Armus
Wanggi Lim
Patrick Lowrance
Tom Barclay
Julie McEnery

Affiliation

Representing

Caltech/IPAC
UH/USyd
PSI
STScI
UC Berkeley
IAC
UNSW
USC
LSU
SSP/Minor Planet Center
MPIA
Caltech/IPAC

Transiting exoplanets; Microlensing PIT; Transit WFS
Stars and stellar populations
Solar system science liaison
Stars and stellar populations
Microlensing; Compact Objects, Star Formation, Dynamics
Stars and stellar populations; ESA liaison
Transiting exoplanets; Stars and stellar populations
Cosmology and gravitational waves
Microlensing; Microlensing PIT simulations working group
Solar system science liaison
Stellar populations, galactic structure & dynamics
Stars and stellar populations; Microlensing PIT

STScI
STScI
STScI
STScI
STScI
IPAC
IPAC
IPAC
GSFC
GSFC

SOC
SOC
SOC
SOC
SOC
SSC
SSC
SSC
Roman Project Office
Roman Project Office

Table 2: GBTDS Definition Committee Members

At the Roman science conference, the committee also took an additional day to meet face-to-face. This
time was used to hear updates from the project office, to report on the previous work assigned, and to
subsequently rank the science cases; the final rankings are provided in Table 4 and are discussed in Section
3. These rankings were then used to inform the parameters of the simulations to be run by the microlensing
PIT. With the highest ranked science goals in mind, the committee drafted straw underguide, nominal, and
overguide surveys.
Members of the microlensing PIT simulation working group, led by committee member Matthew Penny,
performed a slew of simulations spanning a comprehensive set of the parameters and modifications in Table
4. These simulations are described in detail in Appendix B. They were designed to provide, for combinations
of the number of fields, the location of the fields, the exposure time per observation, and the observing
cadence, a measure of the yield of bound and free-floating microlensing planets, to assess whether a given
combination would satisfy the baseline science requirements. The goal of the committee was to select
a survey design that would optimize the probability of meeting the baseline science requirements, while
maximizing the potential of the data for science discovery. Given the uncertainty inherent in the simulations
the the underlying model assumptions, discussed in Appendix B, the committee assessed several survey
designs for each of the scenarios in Table 1 that took optimistic, moderate, and conservative postures on the
microlensing yield margin above the baseline science requirements. The results are discussed below.

3
3.1

Discussion of Results
Summary

Table 4 shows a high-level summary ranking of proposed GBTDS survey strategies. Strategies are grouped
based on common recommendations across multiple white papers and science pitches. The relative ranking
of each strategy was established by taking the hightest grade of a white paper or science pitch that proposed
a given modification, with grade assigned through the process described in Section 2.4 following the rubric
18

Score

Impact

How impactful
would the science goal be if
achieved, over
how wide an
area of astrophysics?

3

2

1

Feasibility

Synergy: Science

How likely is the
proposed strategy
to yield the stated
science result?

If there is a proposed change to
the survey, how
useful would the
proposed survey
strategy be for
other
science
areas?

Synergy: Surveys
If there is a
proposed change
to the survey,
how useful would
the
proposed
survey strategy
be for other surveys, including
ground-based
surveys
and
space-based missions?

Uniqueness

How
uniquely
is the Roman
GBTDS suited
to address this
science?

Good

The
proposed
science would
have
significant
impact,
resolving longstanding questions, opening
up new areas of
inquiry, and/or
impacting multiple sub-fields in
astronomy.

The
proposed
strategy is very
likely executable,
given the improved
survey
parameters, while
achieving
the
GBTDS Level 1
science requirements.

The
proposed
strategy would
enable or enhance
science
return
for a number of
science
areas,
as explicated in
other white papers and science
pitches.

The
proposed
strategy would
enable or enhance
science return for
a number of other
surveys/missions,
as explicated in
other white papers and science
pitches.

The
Roman
GBTDS would
be the only opportunity in the
next decade to
perform this survey and address
the stated science
case, and there
are no other data
with which this
science could be
enabled.

Average

The
proposed
science would
have some impact, addressing
specific focused
questions,
extending previous
datasets usefully,
and/or impacting
one sub-field in
astronomy.

The
proposed
strategy is potentially executable,
given the improved
survey
parameters, while
achieving
the
GBTDS Level 1
science requirements.

The
proposed
strategy may enable or enhance
science return for
a limited number
of science areas.

The
proposed
strategy may enable or enhance
science
return
for a limited
number of other
surveys/missions.

The
Roman
GBTDS would
be one of limited
opportunities to
address the stated
science case.

The
proposed
science would
have
minimal
impact,
not
addressing any
particular stated
questions, and
repeating or only
marginally extending previous
work.

The
proposed
strategy is sufficiently far from
the
nominally
stated parameters
that, even with
improved survey
parameters, it is
unlikely that we
would be able to
perform the proposed survey and
achieve the Level
1 GBTDS science
requirements.

The
proposed
strategy would
not enable or
enhance science
return for other
surveys/missions.

The stated science case could
be addressed with
other upcoming
opportunities
and/or
could
already be addressed
with
archival data.

Poor

The
proposed
strategy would
not enable or
enhance science
return for other
science areas.

Table 3: Science Case Evaluation Rubric used by the GBTDS Definition Committee

19

Strategy
Ranked and recommended
Add a field at the Galactic center
Add low-cadence seasons
Maximize season durations
Maximize season cadence
Maximize season cadence for non-F 146 observations
Perform multicolor photometry
Perform grism spectroscopy
Ranked and not recommended
Very high-cadence observations
1-2 GBTDS fields at higher galactic latitude
Add field at Earth-transit zone
Add field for a globular cluster
Not Ranked
Obtain non-periodic cadence
Download uneven resultants
Consider Survey synergies (e.g. Euclid, Rubin)
Perform Long-duration follow-up observations

WPs

SPs

Comments

2,4,6
6,23
3
1,8,21
20
—
—

26
20
—
18
22,24,31
4
—

7,10
8
18
5,19

—
—
—
—

high merit for GA proposal

34
15
11,14
16

—
—
—
—

achieved with default strategy
achieved with default strategy
beyond committee scope
beyond committee scope

new proposal from committee

high merit for GA proposal
high merit for GA proposal

Table 4: Summary of proposed GBTDS strategies that were ranked according to the metrics in Table 3, with references
to white papers (WPs) and science pitches (SPs) in which strategies were proposed. Categories are divided into
strategies that were ranked and recommended, ranked and not recommended, and strategies that were not ranked since
they fall outside the scope of the committee.

shown in Table 3. One strategy (grism observations, Section 3.3.7) resulted from internal committee discussions. The following subsections describe the trade studies and simulations performed to ensure that the
baseline science requirements are met, recommendations to enable or enhance additional science, and recommendations considered but not recommended. The relative ranking in Table 4, combined with the trade
studies and science requirement simulations described in the following sections, were used to draft the final
survey designs in Section 4.

3.2

Trade Studies & Simulations

3.2.1 Number of Survey Fields, Exposure Time and Cadence
A key trade-off for the Roman GBTDS is between the number and location of survey fields, exposure time
and cadence. With fields fixed, specifying either the cadence or the exposure fixes the other parameter.
Figure 5 illustrates this trade-off for a fixed exposure time of 48 seconds using different field configurations,
with a baseline of seven survey fields compared to nine fields, eight with the addition of a field in the Galactic
center, and eight with the Earth transit zone. The simulations were performed using latest estimates for slew
and settle times from the Roman project using the GBTDS - OPTIMIZER code, publicly available on github5 .
Figure 5 demonstrates that the addition of a field at the Earth transit zone would yield an observing
cadence >15 minutes with an exposure time of 48 seconds, both of which are considered to be hard limit for
successfully achieving the exoplanet microlensing science requirements (WP-09). The relative proximity of
the Galactic center to the nominal microlensing fields results a cadence of 14 minutes, while 9 fields is the
largest number of contiguous fields that yields a sub-15 min cadence.
5

https://github.com/mtpenny/gbtds_optimizer/tree/main

20

Figure 5: Cadence for different field configurations with a fixed exposure time of 48 seconds. GC denotes the Galactic
center and ETZ denotes the Earth transit zone.

Scenario
40395
89107
wo407196

Num. fields
5+GC-hi
6+GC-hi
7+GC-lo

texp (s)
66.9
73.0
57.8

Cadence (min)
12.1
14.9
12.6

Nominal
22.2
24.7
28.1

Underguide
20.4
22.7
25.9

Overguide
22.8
25.4
28.9

Table 5: Predicted bound planet detection yield for planet masses in the 0.1–0.3 M⊕ range for the fiducial mass
function from Cassan et al. (2012) (2 planets star−1 dex−2 ). Nominal, underguide and overguide refer to the survey
strategies described in Section 4. For this mass range, the Roman science requirement requires the detection of 16 or
more planets.

3.2.2 Exoplanet Microlensing Yields & Meeting Science Requirements
The performance of the GBTDS survey to achieve science requirements were quantified using the simulation
framework of Penny et al. (2019) and Johnson et al. (2020), including GBTDS - OPTIMIZER. Full details are
given in Appendix B, and Table 11 lists the implementation scenarios that were presented as options to the
committee. In summary, these scenarios are consistent with these prior studies, with 2 major changes:
• survey yields are reduced by a factor of ∼1.4 due to the normalization of the simulations to new, lower
microlensing event rate estimates (Mróz et al., 2019; Nunota et al., 2024),
• survey yields are improved by the better slew performance of Roman relative to that assumed by
Penny et al. (2019), although this is not sufficient to make up for the reduced microlensing event rates.
As a baseline the simulations presented to the committee assumed the cold bound planet mass function
estimated by Cassan et al. (2012), which is forced to saturate at an occurrence rate of 2 planets per star per
decade of mass and per decade of semimajor axis at a mass of 5 M⊕ (see Equation 11). This mass function
was adopted as fiducial for the Roman science requirements documents. All scenarios we recommend will
meet the baseline science requirements on bound planets (EML 2.0.1 and EML 2.0.2), which translate into
a requirement on the number of planets detected. Of these, EML 2.0.2 is the most challenging to meet,
requiring the detection of > 16 planets with masses between 0.1 and 0.3M⊕ . All considered scenarios
result in a yield of detected Mars-mass planets that exceeds this requirement by ≳ 20% (Table 5).
A caveat is that estimates of the microlensing planet mass function using a larger sample (Suzuki
et al., 2016) have ruled out the Cassan et al. (2012) mass function continuing to rise until saturation at
2 star−1 dex−2 , and instead place upper limits on the mass ratio function at low masses that would allow
the mass ratio function to rise up until a saturation point of 0.5 star−1 dex−2 (Figure 6). The requirements
on the exoplanet yield of GBTDS in the Roman science requirements document are set at the levels they
21

d2 N/d(Mp/M⊕ )d(a/AU) [dex−2]

Shvartzvald et al. (2016)
Fiducial mass function
Clanton & Gaudi (2016)
Suzuki et al. (2016)
WFIRST mock

1

0.1

0.01
-1

0

1

2
3
log(Mp /M⊕ )

4

5

Figure 6: Left: Mass ratio function of bound planets from Suzuki et al. (2016), showing that the 2 star−1 dex−2
saturated Cassan et al. (2012) mass function (i.e. a constant planet frequency f = 2 below q = 10−4 ) is ruled out. The
95% upper limits (pink arrows) would allow a mass function that saturates at 0.5 star−1 dex−2 . Suzuki et al. (2016)
used 22 detected planets for this mass function. Right: Simulated Roman mass function measurement taken from
Penny et al. (2019) comparing the demographic measurement precision in 0.5 dex bins assuming only 50% of detected
planets can be used. Other microlensing mass and mass ratio function measurements are plotted for comparison.

Scenario
40395
89107
wo407196

Num. fields
5+GC-hi
6+GC-hi
7+GC-lo

texp (s)
66.9
73.0
57.8

Cadence (min)
12.1
14.9
12.6

Nominal
33.8
37.8
38.9

Underguide
31.1
34.8
35.7

Overguide
34.8
38.9
40.0

Table 6: Predicted bound planet detection yield for 1 M⊕ planets for an occurrence rate (0.5 planets star−1 dex−2 )
consistent with Suzuki et al. (2016). Nominal, underguide and overguide refer to the survey strategies described in
Section 4. For this mass range, the Roman science requirement requires the detection of 44 or more planets.

22

are to allow precise measurements of the distribution of planet masses down to ∼Mars mass. The mission success criteria will be met if the mission could have delivered yields surpassing the requirement
under the assumption of the fiducial mass function. However, in order to do the science that Roman
is designed for (measuring the detailed shape of the mass function, dividing samples by other properties
to search for variance across a parameter, etc.) Roman will need to detect at least as many planets as its
requirements state, even if the abundance of those planets is lower than expected. If the mass function
saturates at 0.5 star−1 dex−2 , then in practice GBTDS will not meet its requirements for 0.1 M⊕ , with an
expected yield of ∼5 instead of 16 detections. Even for Earth-mass planets that have a requirement of at
least 44 detections, with the lower mass function saturation point GBTDS will struggle to meet this, with an
expected yield of at most 40 planets (Table 6).
The simulations thus imply that, under the assumption of the Suzuki et al. (2016) mass function,
the Roman GBTDS may not meet all its science requirements even if the full overguide allocation is
optimized for microlensing. Since meeting the requirement would require an allocation larger than
the overguide, the committee chose not to sacrifice other science over optimizing microlensing science
requirements. We recommend that the ROTAC uses the assumption of the saturated Suzuki et al.
(2016) mass function when evaluating whether the GBTDS meets its science requirements.
3.2.3 Microlensing Yield Margins
The simulations do not contain margin, except that carried by the project on hardware specifications.
3.2.4 Survey Time Accounting
Some proposed strategies require time allocations outside the main microlensing observations. Accounting
for this time was done by using fiducial exposure times from Penny et al. (2019) (50 sec in the primary F 146
filter and 250 sec in a secondary filter), custom exposure times according to each science case for other filters
and grism observations, and nominal slew and settle times (45 second for slews between consecutive fields,
75 seconds from contiguous fields to the galactic center). Total times were then adjusted according to the
number of fields, the proposed length of each observing season and the number of desired visits/exposures,
and added to the total microlensing observing time to arrive at the total survey duration. These numbers
were then adjusted to match the allocations for the nominal, underguide and overguide survey.

3.3
3.3.1

Recommended Survey Strategies
High-cadence Microlensing Fields

Given the results of the simulations, described in more detail in Appendix B, we recommend observing 5–7 microlensing fields towards the Galactic bulge, with a minimum cadence of 15 minutes, for
six of the 10 available bulge seasons. We recommend that the allocated time for each bulge season be
spread over the maximum observing duration for each season (assumed in this report to be 72 days).
We recommend that the first three and the last three available bulge seasons are observed at this high
cadence, to maximize the number of microlensing events for which the source-lens proper motion can
be used to measure precise planet masses. Additional details for this strategy across the underguide,
nominal, and overguide scenarios are provided in Section 4.
“Blue” filter observations in F 087 will play an important role in many of the science cases served by
GBTDS. The highest microlensing event rates can be found in the northern bulge (b > 0) with peak rates
about 10% higher than in the south (b < 0). However some of the highest microlensing event rate areas on
both sides of the plane have moderately high extinction, and on average the extinction in the optimal areas
of the north is higher than the optimal areas in the south. As shown in Figure 7, the southern bulge has some
area (≲20%) with acceptable microlensing event rate and AZ < 1, whereas the northern bulge has none.
23

Figure 7: Z-band (≈ F 087) extinction in the GBTDS area computed from the Surot et al. (2020) E(J −Ks ) reddening
map, converted to AZ using estimates of total to selective extinction AKs /E(J −Ks ) and AKs /E(Z −Ks ) in different
quadrants near the Galactic center from Alonso-Garcı́a et al. (2017). The southern part of the bulge has significantly
lower Z-band extinction.

The total area with AZ < 1.5 in the southern bulge is much larger than in the north.
To better enable microlensing and non-microlensing science cases that rely on blue filter observations,
we recommend placing the fields in the southern Galactic bulge. There, we recommend field locations
that are slightly away from the highest microlensing event rate areas in order to increase the area of
the fields with low extinction, especially in the F 087 band, as seen for example in Figure 7. In
addition to preferring the southern bulge for lower extinction, we recommend keeping the GBTDS
fields in the south due to the longer history of microlensing observations there, which will enable
more measurements of masses for microlensing events that have already occurred.
3.3.2

Adding a field at the Galactic Center

We recommend adding a field pointed at the Galactic Center (including SgrA*) in all survey scenarios.
In the nominal and overguide scenarios, we recommend the Galactic center field is imaged with the
same cadence as all other fields. In the underguide scenario, we recommend the Galactic center field
is surveyed once every 12 hours in F 146 and F 213 filters.
The addition of a Galactic center field at high cadence enables a broad range of new and impactful
science on Galactic structure, supermassive black hole (SMBH) accretion physics, and exotic stellar and
compact object populations while also contributing to our understanding of exoplanet demographics as a
function of Galactic latitude via microlensing and transit events. The Galactic center field offers a unique
high-resolution view of the nuclear star cluster, a supermassive black hole and its surroundings, an enhanced
region of compact objects, including a magnetar, and at least three massive (> 104 M⊙ ), young (<10 Myr)
24

star clusters (Arches, Quintuplet, and the Young Nuclear Cluster). High-cadence observations of this field
are particularly powerful for probing the gas accretion flow onto the SMBH, finding optical counterparts
to flares from compact objects in binaries, detecting black holes in compact binary systems with a star or
white dwarf via gravitational self-lensing, and using the distribution of microlensing events at all timescales
to probe the mass function of planets, stars, and compact objects at different Galactic latitudes. WP02 also
pointed out the abundance of X-ray sources near the Galactic center.
A slower cadence in the underguide scenario would still enable searches for stellar mass black holes in
long-duration microlensing events, astrometric wobble searches for compact object + star binaries, dynamical studies of stars near the SMBH and searching for evidence of intermediate mass black holes, proper
motion searches for star clusters and associations, and long-term photometric monitoring of accretion flows
onto the SMBH or mass-loss from the numerous massive young stars in this region.
In all scenarios, the Galactic center field should be treated equivalently to all other fields with respect to
low-cadence seasons, photometry snapshots, and grism snapshots. Multi-filter data is particularly important
for the Galactic center field as there is strong and variable extinction. We note that the inclusion of the
Galactic center at the same cadence as the microlensing fields on average reduces the microlensing exoplanet
yield by the equivalent of removing 53 days of survey time, or 13% of the nominal survey.
3.3.3 Maximize color cadence in two filters
GBTDS is required to observe its fields in one filter blueward of 1µm and one filter redward of 1µm (besides
F 146) at better than daily cadence. These observations enable measurement of microlensing source colors
and color-dependent centroid shifts, both of which can lead to mass measurements of the planet host and
its planet. High cadence color observations of variable stars, e.g., RR Lyrae, SX Phoenicis, and eclipsing
binaries, are particularly valuable. In particular, extinction measurements on a star-by-star basis can be
provided by using RR Lyare light curves (Saha et al., 2019). The RR Lyrae period-luminosity relation and
thousands of eclipsing binary light curves will provide distances accurate to the 2–3% level. The extinction
and the distance measurements can be used to produce a high-resolution three-dimensional reddening map
of this region of the Galactic bulge. The map will be a valuable tool to de-redden color-magnitude diagrams,
enabling the study of the Galactic bulge stellar populations. The color information can be used to provide
metallicities of stars (Johnson et al., 2022), to complement the metallicity measurements from the snapshot
grism observations (see Section 3.3.7).
We recommend taking observations in two additional filters once every 6 hours each, spaced from
each other by 3 hours to give one additional filter measurement every 3 hours. The observations
should use the same exposure time/MA table as the wide filter observations.
The microlensing PIT, and several WFS teams, are currently undertaking studies of the optimum filters
and filter cadence to use, but these are not yet complete.
We recommend the ROTAC and/or project accept input on the final filter choice when it is available as
it should not affect the survey architecture or project operations unless the frequency of filter changes
is too high. In the meantime, we recommend adopting the F 087 (∼z) and F 213 (∼ Ks ) filters as
the additional filters for color observations, while keeping open the possibility that the study results
could influence an alternative recommendation.
The GBTDS fields will have high extinction, so regular F 062 likely will not reach sufficient precision, or
would require too much exposure time. After that, F 087 and F 213 offers the longest wavelength baseline.
F 213 has a higher thermal background than F 184, but lower extinction.

25

Figure 8: Left, from Wilson et al. (2023): the relative yield change of transiting planets with different sizes as a
function of observing cadence in high-cadence GBTDS fields. Right, from Weiss, Downing et al. (in prep): Histogram
of absolute H-band magnitudes of red giants with detected asteroseismic oscillations in a single GBTDS fields using
a 7.5 min cadence (blue) and using a 15 min cadence (green).

3.3.4 Maximize Season Cadence & Duration
Faster sampling (higher cadence) and longer baselines of GBTDS time series will have broad positive impact
on a wide range of science cases. For example, Wilson et al. (2023) demonstrated that increasing the cadence
from 15 min to 10 min would yield a ≈50% increase the yield of transiting exoplanets with sizes smaller
than Neptune (Figure 8, left panel). Faster sampling is also expected to increase the yield of asteroseismic
red giants by decreasing the noise floor required to detect oscillations, by about a factor of 2 when doubling
the cadence (Figure 8, right panel). A faster cadence is also expected to strongly increase the yield of freefloating planets via gravitational microlensing due to the shorter lensing timescales, in particular in the mass
range between Pluto and Mars (Gould et al., 2024).
WP03 argued using Fisher matrix analysis of simulated GBTDS observations that decreasing the season
duration degraded the measurement of important microlensing parameters like the event timescale, microlensing parallax, and source flux, each of which can play an important role in measuring the mass of the
planet host. This degradation and loss of significant measurements happened in a larger fraction of events
than the fraction of time taken away from a full 72-day season.
We therefore recommend that GBTDS observations should be scheduled to span the whole 72-day
bulge season (or longer if technically feasible), with any interruptions be scheduled in the middle of
the season. Given expected MSOS procedures, interruptions are best placed at least eight days after
the beginning or before the end of the season, in the part of the season closest to the winter solstice
when it is harder to observe the GBTDS fields from the ground.
3.3.5 Low-cadence Seasons
During each year, the Galactic Bulge is visible for two 72-day seasons centered approximately on the vernal
and autumnal equinoxes. In the first 5 years of Roman operations, as noted previously, we recommend that
the GBTDS will conduct high-cadence observations during six of the 10 available seasons.

26

Figure 9: The fractional improvement in mass measurements for microlensing events with different low-cadence, gapfilling observation strategies. For the ∼6500 detectable events simulated, over 1000 events show a > 3× improvement
in the lens mass uncertainties for ≳5 day cadence in the four gap seasons (line colors). The lens mass uncertainties are
estimated using simulated photometric and astrometric lightcurves with 15 minute cadence during the six high-cadence
RGBTDS seasons and different cadence (line colors) in the four low-cadence seasons and using a fisher sensitivity
analysis.

In addition to these six high-cadence seasons, we recommend that the Galactic bulge be observed at
low cadence for the remaining four of 10 available seasons to cover some of the long gaps. During
these low-cadence seasons, the GBTDS fields should be observed for 1 hour (4×12–15 min cycles)
every 5 days in the nominal scenario, or every 3 days in the overguide scenario. We recommend every
epoch be observed with the wide F 146 filter and 2 others (likely F 087 and F 213), to also acquire
color (temperature) information (see Section 3.3.3).
The low-cadence seasons will be extremely valuable to constrain long-duration microlensing events.
For instance, a 10 M⊙ black hole at 4 kpc will produce a microlens event with an Einstein crossing time
of tE ∼ 80 days, with the photometric signal lasting ∼ 3tE and the astrometric signal lasting ∼ 8tE . If
the black hole is in a binary system, the astrometric trajectory can change dramatically over the course of
10 days due to caustic crossings or near approaches. Such features would largely be undetectable without
low-cadence seasons. Furthermore, long-duration microlensing events have parallax effects that can only be
disentangled by sampling both in March and October seasons when the parallax signal is maximized.
Figure 9 quantifies the improvement in mass measurements for microlensing events with different cadences. Results are based on simulations of GBTDS microlensing photometric and astrometric lightcurves
of all lens types with different gap-filling strategies, and then performing a Fisher matrix analysis on the
lens mass. Out of ∼6500 events simulated, ∼1000 events show a 3× improvement in lens mass errors with
3-5 day cadence.
These observations will also allow for the detection of thousands of known and new variables, such
as Cepheids, Miras, and eclipsing binaries, and enable the detection of the rare ultra-long period (ULP)
Cepheids. It is important to characterize their period-luminosity relation to confirm they are standard can-

27

Table 7: Pandeia-generated exposure times to reach SNR∼100 for a target star with F 146AB = 21.2.

Filter
F 213
F 184
F 158
F 129
F 106
F 087
F 062

Exposure time (sec)
286
102.3
120.2
170.8
284.6
778
4916

dles; if they are, they could be observed up to distances of ≈ 100 Mpc, allowing a direct cosmological
measurement of H0 without using secondary standard candles (Musella et al., 2024).
In the context of the low-cadence observations, the synergy with the Vera Rubin Observatory survey
is fundamental, enabling a better characterization of the known and new variables detected in the Galactic
bulge (see Section 1.3.8).
3.3.6 Snapshot Observations: Multicolor Photometry
The Roman WFI has eight science filters with bandpasses spanning 0.48–2.3 µm (see Figs. 10 and 23). We
recommend that the main high-cadence survey observations for gravitational microlensing be carried out
with the wide F 146 filter, with additional observations taken in 2 narrower filters interspersed at a coarser
cadence to support planet mass measurements (see Section 3.3.3).
To enhance the science outcome of the GBTDS, we recommend “snapshot” observations of all
GBTDS fields using the five science filters that are not regularly obtained at higher cadence.
These observations would be conducted at low time cost to the survey, while yielding precise characterization of the stellar population in the GBTDS fields by: (i) providing photometric colors which can be
used to constrain effective temperatures and metallicities; (ii) constraining the flux across the NIR spectral
energy distribution, which can be used to constrain bolometric fluxes; and (iii) constraining reddening when
combined with independent effective temperature constraints, e.g. from ground-based or grism spectroscopy
(Section 3.3.7). Figure 10 shows the filter transmission curves with spectral energy distributions of mainsequence GKM stars, demonstrating that the filters capture a significant fraction of the SED of stars with
spectral types M5 and later.
To estimate the science time charged to the survey, we used the Pandeia exposure time calculator (STScI
version 2024.9.1)6 to determine the exposure times necessary to reach SNR ≃ 100 for a target star with
F 146AB = 21.2 in each filter (Table 7). From the Pandeia determinations, exposure times for the F 062 filter
are found to be considerably expensive. Yet, expanded wavelength coverage is valuable for constraining
metallicity and reddening, even at lower precision. Regular observations in (the presumed) F 087 and F 213
filters in the main GBTDS seasons will eliminate the need for snapshots in these next most expensive filters.
To meet the aforementioned SNR requirement, we recommend observations in four filters, F 106,
F 129, F 158, and F 184, at three sub-pixel dither positions to enable full reconstruction of the point
spread function. We also recommend additional observations of the F 062 at six sub-pixel positions
to achieve a lower signal-to-noise target of SNR ≃ 10.
6
The “Release Notes” and other associated Pandeia documentation detail a few issues including the lack of explicit support for
dithering as well as inconsistencies with the APT. These issues will impact the accuracy of ETC determinations.

28

Figure 10: Normalized spectral energy distributions for main-sequence stars of different effective temperatures taken
from MARCS model atmospheres (solid lines). The gray lines and shaded regions show the normalized transmission
of the Roman WFI filters, excluding the broadband F 146 filter used for the main microlensing survey.

As a result, the total exposure time over the 5 filters is ≈ 300 minutes, resulting in ≈ 5 hours of science time
to complete one snapshot observation of seven GBTDS fields.
3.3.7 Snapshot Observations: Grism Spectroscopy
The main component of the GBTDS is time-domain imaging. The legacy value of this data set can be greatly
boosted by grism spectral imaging7 across the fields, even at a single pass at a single orientation. Roman’s
grism covers the range of 1.0–1.93 µm at a resolution of ∼500. Such data would result in a vast number
(about 500,000) of high-S/N stellar grism spectra, as illustrated in Figures 12 (left panel) and Figures 13. At
high S/N (≳ 100) stellar spectra at all temperatures contain diagnostically valuable spectral features in the
Roman grism’s spectral range, in particular for 1.5 µm < λ < 1.75 µm (Figure 12, left panel). The primary
information to be obtained from these spectra includes:
1. the identification of all luminous hot stars and estimate of their temperatures.
2. the temperatures and metallicities for all luminous cool stars (to 40 K and 0.05 dex, respectively, in
the S/N ∼ 100 photon-noise limit).
3. the radial velocities (to about 8 km/s in the S/N ∼ 100 photon-noise limit for cool stars) to complement
the proper-motions to yield 3D velocities.
These will serve a broad range of legacy science, including: dynamical analyses of the innermost galaxy;
the Milky Way’s central recent star formation history; the incidence of orbital kicks of young stars from the
SMBH; and finally they can provide stellar parameters of giant stars with asteroseismic parameters from the
time-domain photometry offers, crucial for age and mass estimates (e.g. Silva Aguirre et al., 2018).
Spectral imaging in an already (photometrically) dense field raises the specter of prohibitive crowding.
Using the Besançon models of the Milky Way, we explored this with analytic estimates. We know from
7

Spectral imaging is often also referred to as ’slitless spectroscopy’

29

Figure 11: Illustration of a (stacked) grism exposure in one of the GBTDS fields, showing a small portion of a
2000 × 200 mock grism image, with 0.1′′ pixels. The full image contains 150 stars at K=16 (SNR=100 per pixel),
and 1,500 fainter stars at K=18.5. This corresponds to 5 × 105 and 5 × 106 stars per square degree, respectively,
roughly the density of the Bulge Survey fields (see Figure 13). Using the fact that the space of stellar spectra can be
linearized we have shown that it is possible to extract the brighter spectra (to about K=16) accounting for the extensive
contamination of all the fainter spectra, whose existence and location is known from photometry.

numerical experiments (see Figure 11 for an example simulated grism image) that the spectral analysis
of any one star is only affected moderately, if the flux from any overlapping spectra is subdominant (D.
Finkbeiner, personal communication). Therefore, we estimated as a ‘confusion limit’ the magnitude at
which any random star has a > 50% chance of being contaminated by a brighter star, which is KAB ≈ 16,
as shown in the right panel of Figure 13. The left panel of Figure 13 shows that this magnitude limit
corresponds to about 0.5 million stars per square degree. Finally, the CMD in the right panel of Figure 12
shows that this implies that one would get spectra (at the distance of the Galactic center) of basically all
RGB (and RC stars) and of all stars at ≳ 2 M⊙ .

3.4

Strategies Considered but not Recommended

3.4.1 Globular Clusters
Galactic globular clusters (GGCs) are among the oldest stellar systems in the Universe and a full understanding of their origins will shed light on the formation history of our Galaxy as well as other similar galaxies.
GGCs have long been assumed to be simple stellar populations, with their resident stars exhibiting the same
extinction, age, and chemical composition. However, during the last two decades, high-resolution spectroscopic studies have shown that most GGCs display a large spread of light elements and anti-correlations of
Sodium (N a) and Oxygen (O). This evidence suggests the presence of more than one generation of stars in
these systems, with the younger generation born from a stellar medium enriched by the material ejected by
the previous one. Candidate polluters are intermediate-mass asymptotic giant branch stars or massive rotating stars, but a consensus on the pollution mechanisms has not been reached yet; for a critical discussion on
the various hypotheses on the origin of abundance inhomogeneities in GGCs see Gratton et al. (2019).
Recent photometric and spectroscopic studies disclosed a new class of GGCs in the Galactic bulge,
named Fossil Fragments, such as Terzan 5 and Liller 1 (Ferraro et al., 2021). These clusters show the
presence of the classical ‘old’ stellar population and one or two much younger sub-populations (t ≈ 1–
4 Gyr) at different metallicities (Dalessandro et al., 2022; Crociati et al., 2023); evidence indicates that they
might be the remnants of more massive stellar systems that coalesced and contributed to the formation of
30

Figure 12: Left: Simulated grism spectra of stars, at R∼ 500, across across a wide range of effective temperatures.
The wavelength region shown is most informative across stars of all temperatures. Right: K-band color-magnitude
diagram for solar-metallicity populations across many ages at the distance of the GC. The dashed line denotes the
crowding limit for a texp = 300 second grism snapshot survey of the GBTDS fields (see Figure13)

the Galactic bulge. Additionally, many new globular clusters were recently identified in the Galactic bulge
thanks to NIR photometric surveys such as VVV and VVVx (Bica et al., 2024, see Figure 14 and reference
therein). More globular clusters should exist in the Galactic bulge, however it has not been possible to detect
and study these systems in detail due to stellar crowding and the high extinction towards the Galactic bulge.
The Roman Space Telescope will enable us to discover more and to characterize the properties of these
stellar systems thanks to its large field of view, sensitivity, and spatial resolution. In particular, time series
observations towards the Galactic bulge will allow us to identify these old stellar systems from their variables, either RR Lyrae stars for the ‘old’ population or Anomalous Cepheids for the younger populations.
Two white papers recommended the observation of at least one GGC in the bulge with the same cadence
as the microlensing survey. The recommended pointing would be one including two clusters with significantly different metallicities, NGC 6522 ([Fe/H] ≈ -1.3) and NGC 6528 ([Fe/H] ≈ -0.1). The main goal of
these observations are asteroseismic studies, the discovery of new variable stars and associated monitoring,
constraining star properties and stellar evolution models (see Section 1.3.3), and to possibly identify planets
through transits (WP19). Additional targets mentioned include the clusters Djorg 1, Djorg 2, NGC 6540,
Terzan 5, and Terzan 9. Three science pitches also request GBTDS observations of clusters. However, as
shown in Figure 14, no known globular clusters are located within (or even situated nearby) the proposed
GBTDS footprint.
The committee explored alternate globular cluster pointings to those recommended in the white papers,
including one centered on VVV-CL002, the closest to the nominal GBTDS field layout, as well as one
centered on both the VVV-CL001 and UKS 1 clusters, which could both be observed in a single pointing
(Figure 14). The GBTDS - OPTIMIZER code was run for these proposed cluster pointings to determine total
slew times and slew distances. We found considerable increases in the total slew time and slew distance for
the proposed pointings (as compared to baseline estimations), which would have a marked impact on the
nominal GBTDS observational sequence, typically pushing the achievable cadence longer than 15 minutes.
While no globular clusters are part of the GBTDS field recommendations, the committee emphasizes
the strong scientific value of such observations and recommends that such cluster observations be
considered for General Astrophysics proposals.

31

Figure 13: Left: Ks,AB source counts in different directions of innermost Galaxy, taken from the Besançon models:
the densities reach ∼ 106 /deg2 at Ks,AB ≈ 16. Right: This panel illustrates both the crowding of the dispersed
spectral images (left Y-axis, increasing with Ks,AB ) and their individual S/N in 300 second grism exposures (in blue
and right Y-axis, decreasing with Ks,AB ). It shows the crowding limit to be at Ks,AB ∼ 16 (see Section 3.3.7). Beyond
Ks,AB ≈ 16 the spectral S/N also becomes too low to obtain good stellar parameters, vlos (to 10 km/s), Teff , logg, and
[M/H] (for giants) from the spectral features shown in Figure 12. Comparison with the right panel of Figure 12 shows
this snapshot survey can obtain good spectra for most giants to well below the red clump, and for many luminous
young stars, a total of ≳ 500, 000 stars.

3.4.2 Very High-Cadence Observations
Both of the gravitational wave related science cases (see Section 1.3.7) recommended some version of very
high cadence observations, up to 1 minute. WP07 requested these cadences to observe eclipsing binaries
in the Galactic Plane that could be strong sources within LISA. WP10 suggested using a high cadence to
observe micro-hertz gravitational waves using relative astrometry. In addition, while not explicitly a very
high cadence case, it was suggested that higher cadence observations would also benefit free-floating planet
detection (see also the discussion in Section 3.3.4).
Given the extremely high cadence requested by these science cases, most of these cases would preclude
slewing between fields. This focus on just one field, perhaps for a whole season (especially in the case of
WP10), would significantly compromise the other science achievable with the survey, including the ability
to meet the baseline science requirements.
As a test case, the committee considered one day of higher cadence observations per season. First,
this was seen to not be particularly helpful for free-floating planet detection, given that the expected yield
curve saturates above a cadence of about seven minutes (see Fig. 3 of Gould et al., 2024). In addition,
the committee considered the expected gain for gravitational wave detection: while the higher cadence did
extend gravitational wave sensitivity to higher frequencies (up to ∼ 0.01 Hz), the minimal time devoted to
the higher cadence would give a poor sensitivity compared to the expected signals at these frequencies. In
addition, it would not significantly improve the sensitivity at the micro-hertz frequencies targeted by WP10.
On the other hand, WP7 makes the case for detecting 10s of possible-LISA counterpart eclipsing binaries
using only a few hours of 1-minute cadence observations. It was not clear that further observations would
significantly enhance this science case.
In summary, the gravitational wave related science cases could be aided by observing one field at a higher
cadence each cycle. However, the GBTDS cannot be significantly changed to a higher cadence without
sacrificing a significant amount of science. At most, 1 day of higher cadence per season was considered,
but this was not seen as particularly helpful for either science case. Instead the committee encourages
community members interested in these individual science cases apply for General Astrophysics Survey
proposals to meet their needs.
32

Figure 14: Compilation of Inner Galaxy Globular Clusters with the 88997 field layout recommended for the nominal
and overguide scenarios. The figure draws from several recent literature publications that compile information for
globular clusters that reside in the inner region of the Milky Way (Bica et al., 2024; Garro et al., 2024; Belokurov &
Kravtsov, 2024; Pérez-Villegas et al., 2020). As shown, no currently designated Inner Galaxy Globular Clusters fall
within the proposed GBTDS field layouts.

3.4.3 Earth Transit Zone
WP18 suggested observations of the ecliptic plane, approximately five degrees away from the other microlensing fields, in order to observe the “Earth Transit Zone” (ETZ) (see Section 1.3.6). The main motivation is that potential extraterrestrial observers on detected transiting planets would also be able to detect
the Earth as a transiting planet, making them high-priority targets for SETI searches. Similar to the case
considered in Section 3.4.1, such an approach would necessitate a slower cadence for all fields due to the
long slew times between the ETZ field and other fields, or a reduction in the number of Galactic bulge microlensing fields. For example, as shown in Figure 5, if a fixed exposure time of 48 seconds were adopted
and the number of microlensing fields held at seven, the cadence with no ETZ field would be 11.7 minutes,
and with the addition of the ETZ field would be 16.6 min. These slew times were seen by the committee
33

as costly in the face of the science drivers pushing to shorter cadences. GBTDS - OPTIMIZER was run on
the single row 6 field layout with the ETZ and found an optimum 1 M⊕ free-floating planet yield of 30.2
detections in the South, relative to our adopted nominal scenario 88997 yield of 43.1, a reduction of 30%
(roughly equivalent to the loss of 130 days of survey time). A “lite” version of the proposed modification
with ETZ observations only in the first and last season would reduce the impact on microlensing yields, but
at significantly reduced ETZ yields. In its “lite” form the science case was seen as a more appropriate fit for
a General Astrophysics Survey.

3.5

Other Considerations

We recommend that the MA table for the GBTDS be designed to provide good photometry and
astrometry from faint but blended targets up through heavily saturated stars. This likely consists of an
MA table with resultants that are the first and last reads, not averaged together. We recommend that
the remaining resultants consist of a group average over several reads and that these groups distributed
at increasing increments (WP15).
The former allows unsaturated data to be preserved for stars that saturate at any point after the completion
of the first read. The final read request can potentially maximize the signal to noise in pixels dominated by
starlight and far above the readout noise variance. Additionally, a single final read resultant would guard
against the possibility that the Roman H4RG detectors behave similarly to the H2RG detectors in CHARIS,
in which, when a pixel saturates, its excess charge spills over to neighboring pixels, corrupting measurements
of the ramp in the neighboring pixels too (Brandt et al., 2017). The spill-over may conserve charge, which
would enable some form of aperture photometry in stars that saturate.
SP34 suggested adopting a random component in the cadence to prevent strong aliases in frequency.
Ex-officio members of the committee stated that observatory operations within the survey would naturally
prevent a completely uniform cadence, as would random fluctuations in the path around the fields.

4

Technical implementation

4.1

Overview of Survey Components

Table 8, Figure 15 and Table 9 provide a high-level summary of the recommended GBTDS survey strategies,
including survey components and field layouts. All strategies assume that the 5-year Roman mission will
cover 10 seasons in which the galactic bulge is observable for a maximum duration of 72 days. The main
survey components, selected according to the science merits described in Section 1.3, are as follows:
• High-cadence seasons: Observations of the survey fields in six of the 10 available bulge seasons
with a cadence of 15 minutes or faster with the F 146 filter and a cadence of 12 hours or faster
with the F 087 and F 213 (or other recommended) filters to achieve the science requirements of the
exoplanet microlensing survey (Section 3.3.1). We recommend these seasons to be scheduled as the
first three and the last three bulge seasons over the 5-year duration of the Roman mission in order to
maximize the astrometric baseline. Exposure times vary depending survey strategy, as specified in
Table 8. We recommend observations span the full duration of the 72-day bulge season to maximize
the photometric baselines. Where possible, the total number of interruptions to these seasons should
be minimized, and ideally time spent on other programs should be scheduled in the 2nd or 3rd quarter
of the season closest to the winter solstice, when simultaneous ground based observations are harder,
but not too close to the edge of the season.8
8

i.e., if 70 days out of 72 days of a season are allocated to GBTDS, the best possible allocation of the interruption would be as
a single block of 2 days time somewhere in the first half of March, or the last week of September to first week of October.

34

• Low-cadence seasons: Observations of the survey fields over the four remaining bulge seasons with
a cadence of five days or faster with the F 146 filter and the F 213 filter to enable the recovery of
long-duration microlensing events and the detection of multiple types of variables (Section 3.3.5).
For all strategies, we recommend these low-cadence seasons to be the middle bulge seasons over the
5-year duration of the Roman mission. We recommend taking four exposures per visit, for stacking
to improve photometric and astrometric precision, cosmic-ray rejection, and to optimize the science
time-to-slew time ratio. Field locations should be identical to the high-cadence seasons in order to
preserve the target sample, photometric and astrometric baselines.
• Multiband photometry snapshots: Observations of the survey fields with the five filters that are not
used in the high-cadence or low-cadence seasons for stellar characterization (Section 3.3.6). Exposure
times should be chosen to achieve an approximate SNR of 100 for a star with F 146AB = 21.2 mag in
the F 106, F 129, F 158, and F 184 filters (Table 7). We recommend 3 sub-pixel dithers. For the F 062
filter, the exposure should set to obtain a SNR ≈ 10 with rough sampling of 6 sub-pixel dithers.
• Grism snapshots: Observations of the survey fields with the grism to enable measurements of stellar
temperatures, metallicities and radial velocities (Section 3.3.7). We recommend five exposures per
visit with an exposure time of 300 seconds each to achieve a SNR of ≳ 100 for stars with KAB ≈ 16
at a wavelength of 1.65 µm to enable the reliable extraction of stellar parameters (see Section 3.3.7).

4.2

Nominal Survey [420 days]

The proposed nominal survey includes six high-cadence seasons, each with a total observing allocation of
68.5 days. In each season, six contiguous bulge fields and the Galactic center would be observed at the
same cadence, with an exposure time of 73 seconds. This results in a cadence of 14.8 minutes for each field.
The proposed field layout is shown in top right panel of Figure 15 and corresponds to simulation scenario
88997 in Table 11. The nominal survey also includes four low-cadence seasons, where all seven fields are
observed with a cadence of five days, as well as multiband photometry and grism snapshot observations at
the start and end of each high-cadence season, for a total of 12 snapshots over the survey. The nominal
survey design enables a substantial amount of important science, through inclusion of high-cadence
observations of the galactic center, and implementation of all four high-priority science components,
while producing a exoplanet microlensing yield that is optimized to meet the science requirements
(but see also discussion in Section 3.2.2).

4.3

Underguide Survey [380 days]

The proposed underguide survey includes six high-cadence seasons, each with a total observing allocation
of 63 days. Given the shorter available survey time of the underguide survey, we emphasize the microlensing bulge fields, targeting seven contiguous fields with an exposure time of 57.8 seconds. This results in
a cadence of 12.6 minutes for each field. The Galactic center field is included but with a strongly reduced
cadence of 12 hours. The proposed field layout is shown in top left panel of Figure 15 and corresponds to
scenario wo407196 in Table 11. The survey includes two photometric and grism snapshot observations,
one at the start of the first high-cadence bulge season and one at the end of the last high-cadence bulge
season. The underguide survey is optimized to meet the microlensing science requirements (but see
also discussion in Section 3.2.2), at the cost of limiting other important science cases through the significantly reduced cadence of observations of the Galactic center, and minimal snapshot observations.

4.4

Overguide Survey [440 days]

The proposed overguide survey includes six high-cadence seasons, each with a total observing allocation
of 70.5 days. In each season, we observe five contiguous fields and the Galactic center field at the same
cadence, with an exposure time of 66.9 seconds, resulting in a cadence of 12.1 minutes (nearly 20% faster
35

Table 8: Main parameters of each component for the recommended nominal, underguide and overguide GBTDS
survey. See Figure 15 for high-cadence field layouts. Precise lengths for the high-cadence observing allocations will
need to be confirmed through APT calculations.

Survey Component
Number of high-cadence seasons
Observing allocation per season (d)
Feasible season length (d)
Number of contiguous fields
Observing cadence (min)
Exposure time (sec)
Galactic center field cadence (min)
Number of low-cadence seasons
Observing cadence (days)
Number of photometry snapshots
Number of grism snapshots

Nominal
6
68.5
72
6
14.8
73
14.8
4
5
12
12

Underguide
6
63
72
7
12.6
57.8
720
0
0
2
2

Overguide
6
70.5
72
5
12.1
66.9
12.1
4
3
30
30

Table 9: Coordinates for the field layouts for high-cadence seasons shown in Figure 15.

Field Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Nominal
l (deg)
b (deg)
-0.622435 -1.200
-0.213461 -1.200
0.195513 -1.200
0.604487 -1.200
1.013461 -1.200
1.422435 -1.200
0.000000 -0.125

Underguide
l (deg)
b (deg)
0.497757 -1.005558
0.906730 -1.005558
1.315704 -1.005558
-0.115704 -1.794442
0.293270 -1.794442
0.702243 -1.794442
1.111217 -1.794442

Overguide
l (deg)
b (deg)
-0.417948 -1.200
-0.008974 -1.200
0.400000
-1.200
0.808974
-1.200
1.217948
-1.200
0.000000 -0.1250
—
—

than the nominal survey cadence of 14.8 minutes). The proposed field layout is shown in top right panel
of Figure 15 and corresponds to Scenario 40395 in Table 11. The survey furthermore includes four lowcadence seasons with an observing cadence of three days (significantly faster then the 5-day nominal survey
cadence), as well as multiband photometric and grism snapshot observations at the start, middle and end
of each of the ten bulge seasons, for a total of 30 snapshots over the survey. The longer available survey
time enables substantial science through faster cadence observations for both high-cadence and lowcadence observations, as well as an increased number of snapshot observations, while producing a
exoplanet microlensing yield that is optimized to meet the science requirements (but see also discussion
in Section 3.2.2).

5
5.1

Constraints and Considerations
Scheduling constraints

Maximizing the time between the first and the last observationsis important both for exoplanet microlensing
requirements (e.g. by improving the precision of proper motion measurements for source-lens separation)
and other science cases (e.g. by maximizing the frequency resolution for asteroseismic measurements, or
the sensitivity to longer period transiting planets).

36

Figure 15: Proposed fields layouts for the underguide (top left), nominal (top right) and overguide (bottom) survey.
Greyscale contours show the simulated bound microlensing planet yield. Optimized field layouts corresponds to scenarios wo407196 (underguide), 88997 (nominal) and 40395 (overguide) in Table 11. Note that in the underguide
survey the galactic center field will be observed at a strongly reduced cadence.

37

Figure 16: Same as figure 15 but with greyscale contours showing the H-band extinction in each field. Note that in
the underguide survey the galactic center field will be observed at a strongly reduced cadence.

38

We therefore recommend that the first season of high-cadence GBTDS observations be collected as
early as possible in the Roman mission.
High-cadence season observations should be scheduled during the first and last three bulge season,
interleaved by low-cadence observations (for the nominal and overguide scenarios).

5.2

Location of specific fields

The GBTDS field locations in Table 9 have been optimized to achieve exoplanet microlensing science requirements, as discussed in Section 3.3.1. We anticipate that modest changes to the field locations (on the
order of 0.2 degrees) will not significantly affect the science yield.
However, we recommend ensuring that the Galactic center field cover SgrA* as well as the Arches,
Quintuplet and Young Nuclear Cluster.

5.3

Sensitivity to start and end of science operations

Primary timing constraints for the GBTDS are set by the observability of the bulge fields.
Should the Roman launch be timed such that commissioning observations end during a bulge season,
we recommend commencing GBTDS observations if more than eight days remain within a bulge
season, to ensure sufficient data for the MSOS to generate a source catalog and photometry.
If primary mission operations are extended, we recommend pushing observations for the last bulge
season to the end of the primary mission.

5.4

Ancillary data

Ancillary data are formally not required to achieve the GBTDS science requirements. However, as described
in Section 1.3.8, ancillary data will increase both the probability of meeting science requirements and the
science return of the survey as a whole. For example, simultaneous observations of microlensing events with
Subaru/HSC, Rubin or Euclid will allow measurements of a microlensing parallax, improving the ability of
mass measurements for microlensing events.
Additionally, the characterization of extinction and fundamental parameters of the stellar population in
the GBTDS fields, for example through space-based imaging or ground-based spectroscopy, will significantly enhance the science return for studies of transiting planets or general stellar variability, including
asteroseismology, stellar flares, and rotation. Moderate- to high-resolution spectroscopic observations will
be valuable to validate and calibrate the full-field slitless grism spectroscopy (see Section 3.3.7).
Two approved HST programs (GO17776, PI Terry; GO17173, PI Nataf) are scheduled to perform precursor observations of Roman GBTDS fields (see Appendix B for more details). There is also the possibility
of both precursor and simultaneous observations with Euclid (WP11). The former would extend Roman’s
proper motion baseline for mass measurements, and enable an improved optimization of the field location
based on Euclid’s high-resolution visible and near-infrared images. The latter would enable dual-satellite
parallax observations that would enable mass measurements of free-floating planets (as well as bound).
Synergies between Roman and Subaru are currently under study and a call for White Papers for RomanSubaru synergistic observations has been issued. Based on those papers a steering group will make recommendations for allocation of 100 nights of Subaru observing time to support mutual science goals.

39

5.5

Spectroscopic Guiding

Roman does not have an auxiliary Fine Guidance Sensor, but will rely upon WFI for guiding with sub-array
locations set aside on each of the detectors for potential use as guide windows. During Wide Field Spectroscopic Mode (WSM) observations, pointing control will be challenging, as guide stars will be dispersed
with the spectrum edges being employed for guiding (which in turn will necessitate the use of brighter
stars). Guiding performance will impact both the source blending and spectral resolution. As performance
degrades, the achievable magnitude limit will become brighter, but much of the giant star science should
still be feasible. In particular, poor guiding in the dispersion direction will linearly degrade the velocity
precision. The ability to guide during WSM observations in crowded fields is an ongoing investigation.

5.6

Pre-survey requirements

We anticipate no pre-survey data requirements before the GBTDS can be executed.

6

Technical checkpoints from early survey data analysis

6.1

Photometric precision

The proposed survey scenarios (underguide, nominal, and overguide) have been designed to provide a microlensing event yield for bound and free-floating Earth-mass planets that meets the baseline science requirements as simulated in Appendix B, i.e. assuming the Cassan et al. (2012) mass function. This allows
for some modest decrease in the photometric precision for non-saturated sources compared to the noise
model from Penny et al. (2019) (which was assumed for the yields simulations in Appendix B) before the
baseline science thresholds are at risk—the measured photometric precision would need to be ∼three times
worse than expected, following Eqs. 12 and 13 of Penny et al. (2019), to decrease the yield below acceptable
levels. However, assuming the Suzuki et al. (2016) mass function allows no room for degraded photometric
precision (see Section 3.2.2).
The photometric precision for semi-saturated (F 146 < 18 mag) and saturated (F 146 < 16 mag) stars
has important science impact on transiting exoplanets (Section 1.3.6) and asteroseismology of red giant stars
(Section 1.3.3). Specifically, the detection of transiting planets smaller than Neptune around Sun-like stars
(≲1 ppt over 12-hour timescales) and the detection of oscillations in Helium-core burning stars (100 ppm
over periods of hours), both of which make up a large fraction of the expected populations, will likely require
a precision of 1 ppt/15 min for such stars.
Assuming that the MSOS pipeline will not produce light curves for saturated stars, we recommend
that the Roman project engages the community, PIT, and WFS teams to perform early survey data
analysis of saturated stars.
If the photometric precision for these stars is worse than 1 ppt/15 min, this analysis should then inform
possible changes to the observing strategy in future seasons that may mitigate or improve this performance
(e.g. through adjustments in readout and/or pointing schemes).

6.2

Spectroscopic guiding

As discussed in Section 5.5, the utility of the recommended grism snapshots will depend on the on-orbit
pointing control that is achievable in the crowded bulge fields.
If the guiding performance during slitless spectroscopy is such that the achievable magnitude limit
becomes brighter than KAB ≈ 12, we recommend that the Roman project engages with the community to re-evaluate whether grism snapshots should be reduced to the underguide scenario cadence.

40

6.3

Baseline science requirement verification

The survey recommendations outlined in Section 4 are guided by simulated microlensing rates that rely
in turn on empirical planet mass functions and Galactic population models. The GBTDS will be our first
opportunity to test some of the assumptions in these inputs. Although the MSOS will not search the data for
microlensing events until the end of each season, and is not currently expected to provide insight into the
microlensing event rate until the end of the complete survey, the microlensing PIT is planning to re-verify
the science requirements during the survey by updating the yield simulations with on-orbit data quality.
If re-verification leads the project to believe that the GBTDS will not achieve the baseline science requirements (due to, for instance, unexpectedly poor photometric or astrometric precision), we recommend that the observing allocation for each high-cadence bulge season be increased to the maximum
duration (72 days) to recover as much ground as possible towards meeting those requirements.

41

A

White papers and science pitches submitted to the GBTDS

The table below lists submissions that were relevant to the definition of the GBTDS. The full list of white
papers and science pitches are available on the Roman website: https://asd.gsfc.nasa.gov/
roman/.
CCS
Label
WP01

Title

Recommendation

Science Goal / Topic

Asteroseismology with
the Roman Galactic
Bulge Time-Domain
Survey

Add fields where 1mmag
precision is feasible for
saturated stars, or observe
with higher than nominal
cadence
Move one field to the
Galactic center to overlap
with Chandra and Swift fields

To perform asteroseismology
of red giants in the galactic
bulge

WP02

X-ray binaries,
cataclysmic variables and
transients in the Galactic
bulge

WP03

Contiguity is Key: The
length of the Roman
Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey seasons
should be maximized
The Galactic Center with
Roman

WP04

To maximize the season
duration

Add a field at the Galactic
center at the nominal survey
cadence
Add a field to observe one or
two globular clusters, with
increased cadence if feasible

Submitting
Author
Daniel Huber (Huber
et al., 2023)

Orig.
Label
17

To observe high-energy
time-variable phenomena
from compact stellar
remnants, particularly with
low luminosity
Increase the fraction of
exoplanet mass
measurements from the
microlensing survey

Arash
Bahramian

18

Matthew
Penny

19

To provide a legacy dataset
for diverse science

Sean Terry
(Terry et al.,
2023)
Laszlo Molnar (Molnár
et al., 2023)

27

Casey Lam
(Lam et al.,
2023)
Kris Pardo
(Pardo et al.,
2023)

30

Robert Wilson

39

WP05

Asteroseismic sounding
of bulge globular clusters

WP06

Characterizing the
Galactic population of
isolated black holes
Gravitational Wave
Detection with Relative
Astrometry using
Roman’s Galactic Bulge
Time Domain Survey

Add observations during
off-seasons to eliminate long
cadence gaps
Observe 1 GBTDS field per
season at high (∼minute)
cadence

The Demographics of
Transiting Exoplanets
across all Major Milky
Way Environments
The Roman Galactic
Exoplanet Survey
(RGES)
The continuous cadence
Roman Galactic Bulge
survey

Increase cadence of
high-cadence observations

To perform asteroseismology
on cluster stars to measure
RGB/AGB masses, radii,
ages, and discover and
constrain properties of
different kind of variable stars
To enable/improve BH
detection from astrometric
microlensing
To detect gravitational waves
from merging supermassive
black holes out to 1 Gpc, and
to detect the GW stochastic
background in frequency
range between PTA and LISA
To maximize sensitivity to
small transiting planets

Review of exoplanet
microlensing requirements

Achieve Level 1 exopanet
requirements

David Bennett

41

Obtain several hours of high
cadence ( minute)
observations on each of the
GBTDS fields
Coordinate Euclid and
Roman observations of the
same fields

To discover short-period
eclipsing compact binaries

Thomas
Kupfer
(Kupfer
et al., 2023)
Eamonn
Kerins
(Kerins
et al., 2023a)

44

WP07

WP08

WP09

WP10

WP11

Magnifying NASA
Roman GBTDS
exoplanet science with
coordinated observations
by ESA Euclid

42

Improve mass determination
of free-floating planets,
exoplanets and exomoons
detected via microlensing

28

34

46

CCS
Label
WP13

WP14

WP15

WP16

WP18

WP19

WP20

WP21

WP22

WP23

Title

Recommendation

Science Goal / Topic

Search for faint
Cataclysmic Variables at
Galactic Bulge

None

Maximizing science
return by coordinating the
survey strategies of
Roman with Rubin, and
other major facilities
Enabling Stellar Flare
Science in the Roman
Galactic Bulge Survey:
Cadence, Filters, and the
Read-Out Strategy Matter
New Compact Object
Binary Populations with
Precision Astrometry
RoSETZ: Roman Survey
of the Earth Transit Zone
- a SETI-optimized
survey for habitable-zone
exoplanets
Adding Fields Hosting
Globular Clusters To The
Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey

Coordinate Rubin and Roman
observations, including
selection of GBTDS seasons
when Rubin could observe
the interseason gaps
Download unevenly sampled
resultant frames from
up-the-ramp exposures.

Characterize properties of
faint CVs identified with
Chandra, and study the
Galactic Diffuse X-ray
emission
To improve microlensing
event, host star, and variable
star characterization

Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey: Mass
measurement of FFP with
source color
measurements
The Scientific Discovery
Space for the Roman
Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey
Combining transits with
microlensing

Add observations with
different filters at the highest
cadence feasible

Isolated Stellar-Mass
Black Holes: Strategy to
Improve the Efficiency
and Robustness of
Detection with Roman

Add low-cadence (at least
1/10days) observations
during all available
off-seasons

Long duration follow-up

Add a field 5 deg away from
the GBTDS at the Earth
Transit Zone

Add one pointing in a single
season to observe a nearby
globular cluster

Simulate whether increased
yield and cadence required to
meet science requirements
None

43

Submitting
Author
Kumiko
Morihana

Orig.
Label
50

Rachel
Street (Street
et al., 2023)

51

To measure stellar flares in
the infrared

Guadalupe
Tovar Mendoza

52

To discover compact objects
in wide binaries via
astrometry
To detect transiting
exoplanets of significant
interest to SETI.

P. Gandhi (?)

54

Eamonn
Kerins
(Kerins
et al., 2023b)

60

To detect transiting
exoplanets in a globular
cluster, asteroseismology, and
measure bulge structure
through differential
microlensing event rates
To improve rejection of false
alarms and improve color
measurement of microlensing
hosts

Samuel
Grunblatt
(Grunblatt
et al., 2023)

61

Takahiro
Sumi

63

To improve probability of
detection and characterization
of wide-orbit and low-mass
planets
To determine the potential
rate of microlensing planets
that will also transit
To enable/improve BH
detection from astrometric
microlensing

Jennifer C.
Yee
(Yee
&
Gould,
2023)
Jean Schneider

77

Kailash
Sahu (Sahu
& Sajadian,
2023)

82

81

CCS
Label
SP4

SP7
SP8

SP9

SP10

SP12
SP15

SP16

SP17

SP18
SP20

SP21

SP22

SP24

Title

Recommendation

Science Goal / Topic

Stellar characterization in
the Galactic Bulge Fields

Image each field in all 8
filters a few times per season

Roman’s Royal Road to
Stellar Astrophysics
Rotational Light Curves
and Phase Curves of
Small Solar System
Bodies
Stellar Flares in the
Roman Galactic Bulge
Survey
Search for free-floating
planets via double-lens
events
A Massive Compact
Object Census
Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey Exoplanet Phase Curves
The Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey will
Detect Thousands of
Small Transiting Planets
around Mid-M and
Ultra-Cool Dwarfs
A quest for exomoons
with the Roman Space
Telescope
Search for exomoons

N/A

Characterization of stars in
the Roman fields through
color measurements
Eclipsing binary stars

N/A

Solar system objects

N/A

Search for quasars behind
the Galactic bulge via
variability
Brown dwarfs and planets
in multiple systems
More consistent color
measurements of the
microlensing source stars
Survey for Exoplanets
and Brown Dwarfs in the
Galactic Center via
Microlensing Xallarap
Effect

Submitting
Author
Thomas Barclay

Orig.
Label
N/A

Veselin Kostov
Tsuyoshi
Terai

N/A

Stellar flares

Allison
Youngblood

N/A

N/A

Double-lensing events

Makiko Ban

N/A

N/A

Massive compact objects

N/A

N/A

Exoplanet phase curves

William
Dawson
Szilard
Kalman

N/A

Exoplanet yields

Patrick Tamburo

N/A

N/A

Exomoons

Szilard
Kalman

N/A

Increase cadence for at least
one field each season
Add low-cadence seasons
between main GBTDS
seasons
Observe one field at double
the cadence

Exomoons

Radek
Poleski
Takahiro
Sumi

N/A

Jan Skowron

N/A

Jan Skowron

N/A

Shota
Miyazaki

N/A

Use F 087 and F 158 filters
for low-cadence color
measurements in GBTDS
Increase cadence of
alternative filter

44

Detect quasars via light curve
variability
Detect more diverse
companions through
microlensing
Better color measurements
for M dwarfs
Detect planets around source
stars using xallarap effect

N/A

N/A

N/A

CCS
Label
SP26

SP27

SP28

SP31

SP32

SP33

SP34

SP35
SP39
SP40

SP41
SP42

SP43

Title

Recommendation

Science Goal

Transiting exoplanets in
dense cluster
environments
1000 Supernovae
projected behind the
Galactic bulge: detecting
interactions with
companions and
circumstellar material in
continuous very early SN
light curves
Black Hole Microlensing
Survey with Roman and
ULTIMATE-Subaru
toward the Galactic
Center
Constraints on lens
masses for several
thousands of past
microlensing events
including 100 planetary
systems and dozens of
candidates for
free-floating planets and
black holes
Bulge Initial Mass
Function

Add field in the galactic
center

Transit Timing Variations
and White Dwarf
Transiting Exoplanets
with Roman Photometry
Multi-messenger White
Dwarf Binaries in the
Galactic Bulge Time
Domain Survey
Surveying the rotational
properties of TNOs
Asteroseismology of
lensed stars in the bulge
Roman+JASMINE
Galactic Center
Astrometry Survey
Discovering new BLAPs
in the Galactic plane
Precision photometry and
seismology of pulsating
stars across the Milky
Way
Revealing the obscured
and dynamic Galactic
bulge with a wide area
survey

Detect transiting planets in
nuclear star cluster

Submitting
Author
Jens Hoeijmakers

Orig.
Label
N/A

N/A

Supernovae

Dan Maoz

N/A

Observe the galactic center

Find and characterize the
black hole (BH) microlensing
events

Daisuke
Suzuki

N/A

Add two observations at the
beginning and the end of the
GBTDS with F 087- and
F 184-bands of a 10 - 20 deg2
region of the bulge where
past microlensing events have
been observed

Measure lens flux of past
microlensing events

Naoki
Koshimoto

N/A

N/A

Radek
Poleski

N/A

N/A

Calculate the IMF as a
function of galactocentric
distance or the dark matter
content in the Galactic bulge
Transiting Exoplanets

Cadence should not be
strictly periodic

Detect short-period white
dwarf binaries

Matthew
Digman

N/A

N/A

Transneptunian Objects

N/A

N/A

Asteroseismology

Observe the galactic center

Galactic center synergies
with JASMINE

Laszlo Molnar
Laszlo Molnar
Daisuke
Kawata

N/A

Blue large-amplitude
pulsators (BLAPs)
Asteroseismolgy of RR Lyrae
stars

Susmita Das

N/A

Laszlo Molnar

N/A

Identify long-period variable
stars

Matthew
Digman

N/A

N/A

Increase FOV by adding
low-cadence fields along
galactic bulge

45

Daniel
halomi

Ya-

N/A

N/A
N/A

B

Microlensing Exoplanet Yield Simulations

To estimate the yield of detections of cold bound and free-floating planets we used GULLS9 (Penny
et al., 2013; Penny et al., 2019) to simulate microlensing lightcurves and their photometric observations by
Roman. The results of GULLS simulations were given as input to a newly designed optimizer code for the
GBTDS survey.

B.1

Simulation outline

GULLS takes as input catalogs of stars drawn from a synthetic model of the Galaxy representing a small
tile on the sky of solid angle Ωtile , and parameter files describing the observatory and its observations. A
microlensing event is simulated by drawing a source star and a lens star from the Galactic model catalogs,
with their distances, relative motions, and the lens mass determining the properties of the microlensing event
(i.e., Einstein ring radius θE , relative proper motion µrel , Einstein timescale tE , etc.). The impact parameter
and time of the event are drawn randomly from uniform distributions, and a single planet is added to the
lens system with parameters drawn from distributions as desired. Each simulated event i is assigned a raw
weight
wraw,i = 2µrel,i θE,i ,
(1)

that is proportional to the event’s contribution to the overall microlensing event rate in an area of sky, and
is used for normalizing the simulations to microlensing event rates. The event is also assigned an actual
weight
t0,range,i
wi = wraw,i
u0,max,i ζi ,
(2)
365.25d
where t0,range,i is the total range over which event times can be drawn, u0,max,i is the range over which
the impact parameter can be drawn, and ζi is a modifier that can handle certain event rate modifications,
for example for free-floating planets. Each term in the weight can vary from event to event to maximize
computational efficiency.
For free-floating planet simulations the lens star of mass Ml is replaced
p by a free-floating planet of mass
MFFP , effectively providing 1 free-floating planet per star, and ζi = MFFP /Mlens . As a FFP event is
short and isolated, we simulate a single 72-day season and draw the time of the event uniformly within
it, giving t0,range,i = 72 d, and the number of seasons is accounted for in post processing. The impact
parameter is drawn uniformly between 0 and 1 or ρ, the ratio of the angular size of the source to the angular
Einstein ring radius
θ⋆
ρ=
,
(3)
θE
so that
u0,max,i =



1 if
ρ if

ρ<1
ρ ≥ 1.

(4)

For bound planets we keep the lens as the planet host, so ζi = 1. To avoid simulating lightcurves
with little chance of a planet detection, we utilize the caustic region of influence parameterization (Penny,
2014) and define the impact parameter uc and time of the planetary event tc in a coordinate system centered
approximately near or in the planetary caustic or caustics. We simulate the full Roman survey as 6 ×
72 d seasons, and tc is drawn uniformly from within one of these seasons, giving t0,range,i = 432 d. uc
is drawn uniformly from the range 0–rc , where rc is the radius of the caustic region, a function of the
projected separation of the planet in units of the Einstein radius s and the planet-star mass ratio q; as such,
u0,max,i = rc . Similar to FFP simulations, if the angular source size is larger than the caustic region, we use
u0,max,i = rc + ρ as the maximum impact parameter.
9

https://github.com/gulls-microlensing/gulls/tree/dev

46

The weight of each event is normalized over all that are simulated so that the sum of weights over all
simulated events will equal the number of events that are expected to occur in the tile during the simulated
survey
wi
Wi = Ωtile Γdeg2 Np P
,
(5)
j wraw,j

where Γdeg2 is the microlensing event rate per unit area for the tile, computed using the same input Galactic model catalogs following the method described by (Awiphan et al., 2016), and Np is the normalization of the planet distribution to per star units. For example, if the occurrence rate of bound planets is
d2 N/d log M d log a = 1 dex−2 star−1 , i.e, one planet per star per decade of mass and per decade of semimajor axis, and we simulate planets with masses drawn from −0.5 ≤ log(M/M⊕ ) < 0.5 (i.e., 0.3 to 3
Earth masses) and semimajor axis from −0.5 ≤ log(a/AU) < 1.5 (i.e., 0.3 to 30 AU), then the planet
normalization term will be Np = 2. This is the case for our bound planet simulations. For the FFP simulations, we adopt 1 planet per star per simulated planet mass as the assumed FFP abundance, which would
give Np = 1, but we use this modifier to also account for scaling the simulations up from 1 season to 6, and
so we set Np = 6.
We simulate the photometry of each microlensing event by assuming a repeating observing sequence,
usually of fixed cadence in the primary wide filter F 146, with occasional color measurements in two other
filters, usually F 087 and F 213, with full details described in (Penny et al., 2019) and references therein.
The simulations assume CCD-like behavior of the detector, and do not simulate Roman’s MultiAccum
mode, though to account for the possibility to store the first read after 3.04 seconds of the exposure, we
set the full well to be a multiple of the actual full well depth of the detector. To prevent overly optimistic
photometry we add a constant 0.001 mag uncertainty in quadrature to the photon noise uncertainties. Wilson et al. (2023) compared sample-up-the-ramp photometric noise (similar to the MultiAccum photometric
processing) in crowded fields to the CCD-like noise assumed by Penny et al. (2019) and found reasonable
agreement, though we note that the noise curve they used from Penny et al. (2019) did not include the effects
of crowding.
To determine whether a bound planet is detected we fit each simulated event with the model of a single
lens event with initial parameters set to the parameters for the primary lens component. We compute the
significance of the planet detection as
∆χ2single = χ2single − χ2true ,

(6)

where χ2single is the χ2 of the single lens model fit, and χ2true is the χ2 of the original simulated lightcurve
without photometric noise. For the purposes of assessing the yield we require a bound planet event to have
∆χsingle > 160, so that the total yield is
X


(7)
Bound yield Ybound =
Wi ∆χ2single,i > 160 ,
i

where the square brackets are an Iverson bracket representing a selection function, taking the value 1 if the
condition is met, and 0 if not (e.g., Knuth, 1992). For FFPs we impose a ∆χ2 cut relative to a flat line fit to
the lightcurve (i.e., the weighted mean), i.e.,
∆χ2flat = χ2flat − χ2true ,

(8)

requiring ∆χ2flat > 300. For FFPs we also require that they have six consecutive data points that are above
baseline by at least 3σ, the count of the number of points crossing this threshold is N3σ . The more stringent
cuts are required because we must search every star for FFPs, but for bound planets we need only search
those stars that have a detectable microlensing event. The yield of FFP planets is finally computed as
X



FFP Yield YFFP =
Wi ∆χ2flat > 300 N3σ ≥ 6 .
(9)
i

47

B.2

Optimizing number of fields, location, cadence, and exposure time

To inform the committee’s choice of fields, their location, cadence and exposure time we conducted an
optimization exercise with GBTDS - OPTIMIZER10 . The input to this tool is a map of survey yield with an
optional description of how the yield changes with cadence and exposure time, such that




texp,new αexp Γnew αcad
,
(10)
Ynew = Y0
texp,0
Γ0
where Y0 is the input yield map, computed using exposure time texp,0 and cadence Γ0 , and Ynew is the yield
that can be expected for a new exposure time texp,new and cadence Γnew . For a chosen field layout that
can contain fields that are free to move and fields that are fixed to a location on the sky, the tool slides the
free
P fields over the yield map, recomputing the optimum slew path through the fields that takes a total time
tslew that includes settling time and the time taken for a reset read and a reference read of the detector.
At each location we compute the new yield map for all possible combinations of exposure time (sampled at
discrete multiples of the WFI’s tread = 3.04 s readout rate) and cadence that fall within chosen bounds, in
our case 10tread ≤ texp ≤ 40tread , or 30.4 ≤ texp ≤ 121.6 s and 7 ≤ Γ ≤ 15 min. The survey yield per
map tile is scaled by the fraction of the tile that is covered by one of the WFI’s 18 active detectors, which
we term the covering factor.
To make the optimization problem computationally tractable and achieve a reasonable level of precision
in our yield maps, we have performed the full optimization analysis only on the results of simulated maps
of free-floating planet detection yields computed using GULLS simulations. The details of the simulations
used to compute the FFP yield maps are presented by Johnson et al. (2020) with a two major differences.
First, Equation 10 enables exploration of the effect of both cadence and exposure time on the yield. Second,
the Galactic model used has been updated from version 1106 of the Besançon model (Penny et al., 2013).11
The new Galactic model employs S YNTH P OP12 (Klüter & Huston et al. 2024) to draw synthetic stars
from density, kinematic, age, metallicity, and mass distributions. From S YNTH P OP we use the “Huston2024” composite model (Huston et al. in prep); its key components include the Cao et al. (2013) triaxial
bar model with kinematics from (Koshimoto et al., 2021), the (Koshimoto et al., 2021) disk model, and a
Kroupa initial mass function (Kroupa, 2001, equation 2) across all components, truncated at M > 0.08 M⊙
to allow a separate analysis of brown dwarf microlenses, and to exclude brown dwarfs as planet hosts with
the same planet occurrence rate as main sequence stars. Including the brown dwarfs would increase the
microlensing event rate by 20% if Kroupa’s brown dwarf mass function extends down to 5 Jupiter masses.
Stars are evolved and their synthetic photometry computed based on MIST isochrones (Dotter, 2016; Choi
et al., 2016) and their Roman filter magnitudes. The MIST magnitudes for Roman were converted from
Vega to AB magnitudes, and extinction applied in a single screen placed 2 kpc from the Sun13 from the reddening map of (Surot et al., 2020). Extinctions were computed from the reddening map using an RV = 2.5
(O’Donnell, 1994) extinction law in the optical, but with its power law infrared component modified to
match the reddening vector found by Surot et al. (2020).
We find that after adding the missing contribution of brown dwarfs to the event rate, the “Huston2024”
model predicts microlensing event rates that are roughly a factor of 1.7 too large relative to the most recent
measurements by (Mróz et al., 2019) and (Nunota et al., 2024), as shown in Figure 17. Due to an improved
accounting of the number of potential source stars and also photometric calibration in the case of Nunota
10

https://github.com/mtpenny/gbtds_optimizer
a version intermediate to the two publicly available models (Robin et al., 2003) and that accessible at https://model.
obs-besancon.fr/modele_home.php.
12
https://github.com/synthpop-galaxy/synthpop
13
For our microlensing event rate and detectability calculations, the vast majority of source stars are in the bulge and beyond
in the far disk. The Surot et al. (2020) reddening map measures the extinction infront of the bulge red clump stars. So, the exact
location of the extinction in the model has only a small effect on the microlensing results.
11

48

50

Huston2024 x 1.2 / 1.7
OGLE IV (Mroz et al. 2019)

-1 -1
6
Γ x 10 (star yr )

40

30

20

10

0
-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

b (deg)
Figure 17: Comparison of the S YNTH P OP “Huston2024” models predictions of the microlensing event rate per source
for sources with magnitudes I < 21 (red points) to measurements from the OGLE-IV survey Mróz et al. (2019) (black
points) for fields within the Galactic latitude range 3 > ℓ ≥ −3. The Huston2024 model results were multiplied by
1.20 to account for brown dwarfs not included in the catalogs, and divided by 1.7, an arbitrary factor to bring the model
results into alignment with the measurements. Each red point represents a 0.2 × 0.2 deg2 tile on the event rate map,
whereas the OGLE IV data points are the average over a 1.4 deg2 field. The majority of scatter in the model points is
due to variable extinction.

49

Table 10: Power law slopes describing how cadence and exposure time changes adjust the yield

Planet mass
M⊕
0.1
1

Bound planets
αcad
αexp
-0.73
0.54
-0.44
0.34

Free-floating
αcad αexp
-0.92 1.07
-0.43 0.61

et al. (2024), these most recent event rates per source star that are about a factor of 1.4× lower than the
previous generation of microlensing event rate measurements (e.g., Sumi & Penny, 2016), which was already
correcting for an undercounting of source stars in the original measurements of Sumi et al. (2013). We
therefore divide our rates by 1.7 to approximately correct for the overestimate. A more thorough comparison
of event rates predicted by the model to observational data will be presented in Huston et al. in prep.
The maps of simulated free-floating planet yields for 1M⊕ and 0.1M⊕ planets are shown in Figs 18
and 19, respectively, along with maps of the cadence and exposure time power law indices of equation 10,
that indicate how the yield reacts to changes in either parameter. The yield map was computed using a
fiducial simulation of a 6 × 72 day GBTDS survey. The αcad map was computed by inverting equation 10,
inputting the yield of the fiducial survey and a survey with the same exposure time but 7.5 min cadence, and
similarly for αexp where the cadence was fixed to the fiducial simulation but the exposure time was set to
45.60 seconds. The three simulations used the same simulated microlensing events to minimize uncertainties
to to random selection of events.
The maps show areas of high yield on both sides of the Galactic plane within ∼2 degrees of the Galactic
center, but a significant deficit directly in the Galactic plane where the extinction is highest.14 The fractional
errors per map tile due to Poisson noise of the simulated events15 are a few percent and likely below other
major sources of uncertainty, such as the extinction map, extinction law, and constraints on other input
quantities. The errors per map tile are sufficiently small to use tile-by-tile power law indices αcad and
αexp . These show interesting differences in the structure of their maps, with αcad likely being shaped by the
microlensing timescale distribution (see, e.g., Fig. 6 of Kerins et al. (2009)), whereas αexp is more uniform.
Approximate averages for the power law slopes in the region most likely to have the Roman fields are given
in Table 10 for FFPs and bound planets, and, for FFPs of both masses simulated, the magnitude of the
exposure time slope is larger than the magnitude of the cadence slope (αcad = −0.43 and αexp = 0.61
for Earth-mass FFPs, and αcad = −0.92 and αexp = 1.07 for Mars-mass FFPs). This has the important
implication that FFP yield optima will tend to favor longer exposure times over faster cadence with a fixed
field layout. This can possibly be attributed to the N3σ ≥ 6 detection criteria favoring increased exposure
time, because all data points will be improved by increased exposure time, potentially bringing the event
across the threshold, whereas a marginal speed up in cadence may only bring a small fraction of events with
just the right timescale over the threshold. The tendency to favor exposure time is exacerbated by the fact
that for a fixed field layout, increasing the exposure time by some fractional amount will slow the cadence
by a smaller fractional amount due to fixed overheads, or conversely stated, speeding up cadence by some
factor will reduce exposure times by a larger factor because the overheads will remain fixed. Note that these
two tendencies are separate because the input cadence and exposure time variations used to compute the
power law indices are arbitrary and do not compensate for, e.g., increased cadence with reduced exposure
time; so both tendencies act in the same direction to promote increased exposure time and slower cadence.
As the yield of detections is not the only quantity we want to optimize for, we must rely on externally
imposed constraints on the cadence and exposure time to arrive at a reasonable cadence and exposure time
14

We note that the Huston2024 model used in the simulations does not include a nuclear stellar disk population that increases
yields by a factor of between 1 and 4.5 for 1.5 > ℓ > −1.5 and −0.25 < b < 0.25 (Huston et al. in prep.), but not enough to make
these areas competitive
to the peak areas.
pP relative
15
2
Computed as
i Wi /YFFP .

50

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

b (deg)

b (deg)

4

0
1

1

2

2

3

3

4

6

0

4

5

2

l (deg)

0

2

4

4

0.50

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
1
3

3

2

3

2

l (deg)

0

4
5
6
Fractional error (%)

2

4

4

7

0.45

0.40

l (deg)

0

0.35

2

0.30

4

0.25

0.20

1
2

4

2

0

2

6

4

Cadence

4

4

6

10
15
20
1M FFP Detections/survey/deg2

b (deg)

b (deg)

0

8

6

4

2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

2

4

1.0

1.2

1.4

l (deg)

exp

Figure 18: Top left: Map in Galactic coordinates of the predicted detection rate of 1M⊕ FFPs by a 6 × 72 day Roman
survey in units of detections per survey per square degree. The simulated survey’s cadence was 14.73 min and exposure
time was 42.56 seconds. Bottom left: Fractional error of the map due to Poisson realization of simulated events. Top
right: Cadence power law index indicating how the yield responds to a change in cadence expressed as the cycle time.
Bottom right: Exposure time power law index indicating how the yield responds to a change in exposure time.

51

4

3

3

2

2

1

1
b (deg)

b (deg)

4

0
1

1

2

2

3

3

4

6

0.0

4

0.5

2

l (deg)

0

2

4

4

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
0.1M FFP Detections/survey/deg2

4.0

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
1
3

3

5

10

2

15

l (deg)

0

20
25
30
Fractional error (%)

2

4

4

35

1.1

l (deg)
1.0

0

0.9

2

0.8

4

0.7

0.6

1
2

4

1.2

2

0

2

6

4

Cadence

4

4

6

1.3

b (deg)

b (deg)

0

40

6

0

4

2

1

Figure 19: As Figure 18 but for 0.1 M⊕ planets.

52

l (deg)
2

exp

0

2

3

4

4

Figure 20: Example of the output of GBTDS - OPTIMIZER for a single field layout of Nf = 5 free fields with an
additional Galactic center field. It shows the input yield map overlaid with contours (colored lines) of the survey yield
as a function of the placement of the free fields. The arbitrarily chosen example shows a layout with free fields in two
rows at the southern optimum. The text above the figure gives details about the optimum on each side of the Galactic
plane. Note that the microlensing event rates in this plot have not been corrected.

choice. For example, the measurement of Einstein angular radii, and in some events masses, relies on the
lightcurve sampling resolving the source crossing time 2t⋆ = 2θ⋆ /µrel ∼ 1 hour.
Using the 1M⊕ and 0.1M⊕ FFP yield maps we ran GBTDS - OPTIMIZER for a large number of potential
field layouts with between 4 and 8 fields in a compact layout with one or two rows of fields, with all possible
combinations of the number of fields in the top versus bottom row, and with the rows offset by up to two
field widths at either end. We also ran the optimizer with the same field layouts with the addition of a field
at the Galactic center constrained not to move. In all references to the number of fields we do not count the
Galactic center as contributing to the number of fields Nf so that we can keep naming conventions consistent.
We tracked the optima for field layouts places above (north) and below (south) the Galactic plane.
Figure 21 shows the yield as a function of the number of free fields for the optimal layouts for each
field geometry considered. For Earth-mass FFPs the optimum is quite broad with 5 fields giving the overall
optimum, but with geometries containing anywhere between 4 and 8 fields having maximum yields within
∼10% of this. In all cases, a single-row field geometry produces the largest yields in the north (the single
outlying point) and is competitive in the south even with 8 fields. Overall, the north produces yields ∼10%
higher than the south. On each side of the Galactic plane, the inclusion of a Galactic center field reduces
yields by about 12%; this can be alternatively expressed as the additional time required to return the survey
53

60

20

50

30

0.1 MEarth FFP yield

1 MEarth FFP yield

15
40
South, -GalCenter
North, -GalCenter
South, +GalCenter
North, +GalCenter

20

10

5

Requirement σN/N=0.25
10

0

0
4

5

6

7

8

South, -GalCenter
North, -GalCenter
South, +GalCenter
North, +GalCenter
4

Number of free fields

5

6

7

8

Number of free fields

Figure 21: The optimal survey yield plotted as a function of the number of free fields for the all considered field
layouts for Earth-mass FFPs (left) and Mars-mass FFPs (right). Optima for southern fields are plotted with purple and
blue points, whereas northern hemisphere points have green and gold points. Green and purple optima did not include
a Galactic center field, while the blue and gold points show optima when the Galactic center field is included. The left
plot shows the results for Earth-mass FFPs, the right plot shows the same for Mars-mass FFPs.

to the same yield as without the Galactic center field, which is 53 days. In all cases the optima take the
maximal exposure time and slowest cadence allowed by the 15 minute cadence slowest bound, and this
leads to exposure times up to two minutes, a factor of nearly 3 larger than the simulation point from which
equation 10 extrapolates, so caution is needed in interpreting the optimum yields, at least for small numbers
of fields.
The Mars-mass FFP simulations show a much stronger preference for a smaller number of fields, with
4- and 5-field geometries producing yields ∼50% higher than 8-field geometries. The preference for north
over south is much smaller for Mars-mass FFPs, likely due to lower extinction in the best fields in the south,
and the typically lower maximum magnification of Mars-mass FFP events due to the increasing incidence
of finite source effects (see, e.g., Johnson et al. (2020)). As for Earth-mass FFPs, the optima favor longer
exposure times over faster cadence.
The differences between Earth- and Mars-mass planet optima can be expected to be exaggerated further
moving to higher or lower masses, with masses below Mars-mass benefiting strongly from higher cadence
and longer exposure times on a smaller number of fields, and for masses above Earth mass the optimum
number of fields shifting to large values at the expense of exposure time and cadence.
As FFP detection yield is only one metric of success, we investigated the allowed range of number of
fields, cadence, and exposure time that would enable acceptable yields. In figure 22 we show the yield as a
function of cadence and exposure time for all combinations of the number of reads that are allowed within
a Nread = 10–40 range and cadence Γ = 7–15 minute range. We arbitrarily chose yields of 55 detections
per survey for Earth-mass FFPs and 10 detections per survey for Mars-mass FFPs as cutoffs for plotting
(prior to scaling the event rate), though the definition of acceptable may be larger than this. The allowable
exposure time and cadence stratify into separated, roughly linear relations between cadence and exposure
time, with yield decreasing toward faster cadence and corresponding shorter exposure time. We restricted
the analysis to only southern fields. The plots allow a quick way to visualize the menu of available choices
of cadence, exposure time and survey area/number of fields that are available when moving away from the
strictly optimal solution, and the cost they have relative to the optimal yield.

54

Figure 22: Plot of the cadence and exposure time that can provide a solution to the cadence-exposure-fields problem
with a potentially acceptable yield (the lowest yield considered for each planet mass is indicated by the bottom of the
colorbar. Plots on the left are for 1M⊕ simulations, and on the right are for 0.1 M⊕ FFPs. Plots in the top row show
the results without including a Galactic center field, and those on the bottom show results that do include the Galactic
center. Note that the yield scale does not include the 1.7 correction factor.

55

B.3

Bound Planets

Bound planet simulations are significantly more computationally intensive than FFPs, and have a larger
parameter space to cover, so the expansive search for an optimum that we employed for FFPs was not
feasible. Instead, we focused our simulations on a small area of the bulge (2 ≥ ℓ ≥ −1, −0.4 ≤ b ≤ −2.6)
which was most likely to contain the Roman fields. Additionally, the smorgasbord of options in Figure 22
obscures an important choice – the actual placement of fields on the sky – and can just be generally difficult
to digest. To simplify the choice we selected a small number of scenarios from the FFP simulations that gave
potentially reasonable yields while emphasizing different choices that one may wish to make when moving
away from the optimum.
The results are shown in Table 11. The first column of the table is an internal scenario index, the next
three columns specify the number of fields, exposure time, and cadence, then the final columns show the
yield for free-floating and bound planet scenarios. For free-floating planets the yield assumes there is one
free-floating planet of that mass per star. For bound planets, for ease of comparison with Penny et al. (2019)
and Roman science requirements documents, we assume the Cassan et al. (2012) planet mass function
saturated at 2 planets star−1 dex−2 ,
(
2 dex−2
if Mp < 5.2M⊕
d2 N

−0.73
=
(11)
Mp
−2
d log Mp d log a
0.24 dex
otherwise.
95M⊕

where N is the number of planets per star, Mp is the planet mass, a is the semimajor axis, and dex−1 can
be read as per decade of one of the logged quantities. We actually run our simulations drawing a single
delta function mass and assume the occurrence rate is that of a 1-decade-width bin around that mass. The
semimajor axis is drawn from a log uniform distribution with bounds 0.3 ≤ a < 30 AU (the semimajor axis
span of solar system planets).
We apply the same strategy as FFPs to estimate the impact of cadence and exposure time changes,
simulating the same events with a fiducial (Γ, texp ) = (14.73 min, 42.56 s) and varying cadence and texp
independently to compute the αs. The limited-area maps do not achieve the same fractional precision as the
FFP maps, so we compute αcad and αexp over all simulated events rather than per map tile. Doing so allows
us to estimate the yield for all of the FFP scenarios with fields contained within the range of the bound planet
simulation map.
The power law slopes for each bound planet simulation are shown in Table 10. Notably, for low-mass
bound planets the magnitude of αexp is less than the magnitude of αcad , the opposite of the FFP simulations,
where for more massive planets ≥ 10M⊕ , the magnitude of the slopes are essentially equal. We will not
speculate on the cause of this here. The result is that for the lowest mass bound planets, faster cadence could
be more valuable than increased exposure time, but we note that faster cadence still comes at a larger cost in
reduced exposure times due to overheads, so may only be beneficial for the lowest-mass planets ≲ 0.1M⊕ .16
The majority of scenarios in Table 11 are for scenarios with a Galactic center field. Scenario wo407196
does not contain a Galactic center field and is used as a proxy for the underguide survey, which has the
Galactic center field observed at a lower cadence that is negligible to the yield.

B.4

Comparison to previous Roman predictions

The set of GULLS simulations presented here incorporate significant changes over previous GULLS simulations. The input Galactic model is new, the lightcurve generation and some of the fitting has been updated
16

As an example, we can take scenario 88997 (Γ, texp ) = (14.8 min, 73 s), which has 377 s of fixed slewing and settling overhead and 511 s of exposure time over 7 fields, and see what happens if we keep the same fields but change the
cadence to 12 min (∼20% faster). The overheads stay the same, but now there’s only 12 min = 720 s total available, leaving 343 s for exposure or 49 s per field. Applying equation 10 with the 0.1M⊕ αs predicts a fractional change in yield of
(12/14.8)−1.09 (49/73)0.53 = 1.02, i.e., a 2% improvement in yield. With the Earth mass power laws, the yield would be reduced by a factor of (12/14.8)−0.59 (49/73)0.42 = 0.96 or 4% worse.

56

Table 11: Bound yields assuming the Cassan et al. (2012) planet mass function for selected field-texp -cadence scenarios, and free-floating planet yields assuming one FFP of a given mass per star.

Scenario
Nfields ∗
Index
1M⊕ -FFP yield maximizing
40387
5
88997
6
40385
5
40382
5
138513
7
197139
8
Faster cadence
2073
4
40395
5
88890
6
155067
7
197138
8
Reduced F 087 extinction
112327
6
89107
6
155890
7
40696
5
163000
7
67420
5
51298
5
89193
6
40548
5
201228
8
2440
4
No Galactic center field
wo407196
7
This work P19 comp.
7
Previous GULLS predictions
Penny et al. (2019)
7
#
Johnson et al. (2020)
7
Requirement
–

texp ‡
(s)

Cadence
(min)

94.2
73.0
88.2
79.0
57.8
48.6

14.9
14.8
14.3
13.4
14.9
15.0

10.8
9.2
10.4
9.7
7.9
7.1

44.0
43.1
42.9
41.2
41.2
39.6

13.6
14.1
13.6
13.4
14.1
13.6

147.8
156.9
146.9
145.3
161.1
156.6

88.2
66.9
57.8
51.7
45.6

12.0
12.1
13.0
13.8
14.5

9.9
8.7
7.4
7.2
6.8

38.6
38.4
38.4
38.3
38.5

12.2
13.1
12.7
13.3
13.4

125.2
142.2
135.4
148.7
155.0

73.0
73.0
57.8
91.2
57.8
91.2
91.2
60.8
63.8
48.6
121.6

15.0
14.9
14.8
14.8
14.9
14.8
14.7
13.6
12.0
15.0
15.0

8.8
9.1
8.1
9.7
8.0
9.9
9.9
7.8
8.3
7.0
10.9

39.1
41.6
40.4
38.5
39.3
39.6
40.3
35.6
36.2
39.2
38.4

14.8
14.6
15.0
14.5
14.8
14.0
13.6
14.3
13.5
14.1
13.4

141.4
159.0
156.8
133.9
153.3
135.0
137.1
142.3
142.1
154.6
123.5

57.8
45.6

12.6
15.0

9.2
–

40.4
–

16.6
13.2

163.4
141.3

46.8
46.8
–

15.0
15.0
< 15

–
10.3
–

–
50.4
16

20.5
–
16†

180
–
44

∗

FFP yield
0.1M⊕ 1M⊕

Bound planet yield
0.1M⊕
1M⊕

Number of fields not counting a Galactic center field
These texp vlaues do not include the time to reset the array and measure a reference read, both of which are accounted for as part
of the slew and settle overhead by GBTDS - OPTIMIZER.
†
The requirement is actually on the yield in a logarithmic bin spanning 0.1 ≤ M < 0.3M⊕ in mass, whose center is at log Mp ≃
−0.75, assuming the occurrence rate at that mass is 2 star−1 dex−2 . Given that the yield rises by an order of magnitude from
log Mp = −1 to 0, we assume that at the center of the bin the yield will be a factor of ∼1.7× larger than at log Mp = −1, such
that those simulations nearly meeting the requirement at the bottom of the bin will comfortably meet it at the bin center.
#
These estimates were taken from the log-uniform column of Johnson et al. (2020) table 2, multiplied by 2 to match the mass
function we have used here. We note that the one-per-star column in Johnson et al. (2020) is likely erroneous.

‡

57

to a new public package, simulation post processing has been re-written, and the GBTDS - OPTIMIZER has
been developed to perform the optimization. Additionally, observations of microlensing event rates and
extinction toward the bulge have advanced significantly since the last major simulations were run. It is
therefore important to compare to previous results and attempt to understand any discrepancies.
Two lines in Table 11 provide comparison yields from Penny et al. (2019) predictions of Roman’s bound
planet yields, and Johnson et al. (2020) predictions of FFP yields, and we have computed the estimates
for similar Roman performance with GBTDS - OPTIMIZER. Were Roman’s design and capabilities to have
remained fixed, we would expect the yields now to be a factor of ∼0.7× the previously published results,
because the new simulations were normalized to new, lower event rates from Mróz et al. (2019) that are a
factor of 1.4 lower than the previous normalization used, Sumi & Penny (2016). The use of the new Surot
et al. (2020) extinction map and an extinction law with RV = 2.5 could also have significant impacts on
the results and the normalization process that are harder to estimate quantitatively. We find that new bound
planets simulations with the Roman performance profile and fields used in Penny et al. (2019) predict yields
of 13.2 and 141 Mars- and Earth-mass detections, factors of 0.64× and 0.80× the Penny et al. (2019) yields,
which given the other uncertainties is reasonable agreement. For FFPs our new simulations are producing
yields that are factors of ∼1× and ∼0.8× those of Johnson et al. (2020), though in this case we have not
computed an apples-to-apples comparison yield. This is a smaller than expected change, but may result
from the fields, cadence, and exposure time being optimized for Earth-mass FFPs.

58

Figure 23: Main NIRCam short wavelength detector and WFI imaging filters. Credits to A. Pidgeon (STScI).

C

Synergies with HST and JWST observations

There are a few programs currently observing the same area of the sky covered by the GBTDS survey
with HST and JWST.
For instance, program 17776 (PI: Terry) “A Precursor Survey of the Roman Galactic Bulge Time Domain
Fields”, aims at providing HST ACS and WFC3-UVIS imaging in the F606W and F814W filters of most of
the area covered by GBTDS. These observations will enhance Roman’s ability to characterize the detected
exoplanet systems and to measure extinction values and metallicities of its stellar populations.
There are several JWST programs observing the Galactic center with the imager NIRCam and the spectrograph NIRSpec to study its stellar populations and the central black hole (1306, PI: van der Marel, 1939,
PI: Lu). These observations will be highly complementary to the GBTDS data of the Galactic center, especially given the large overlap of the JWST and Roman WFI imaging filters (see Figure 23.)
The HST and JWST observations will also be very important to improve the astrometric and flux calibration of the GBTDS observations. For instance, the well-calibrated HST and JWST photometry of the
region would constitute an invaluable set of secondary standard stars to perform the photometric calibration
of GBTDS data. Moreover, the HST and JWST observations would provide a first epoch to be used as an
astrometric reference field for Roman. In addition, NIRspec observations could be used to aid the calibration
of the grism spectra in this very crowded stellar region.

59

References
Abbott, R., et al. 2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.03634
Agol, E., & Kamionkowski, M. 2002, MNRAS, 334, 553, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.
05523.x
Akeson, R. L., Chen, X., Ciardi, D., et al. 2013, PASP, 125, 989, doi: 10.1086/672273
Alonso-Garcı́a, J., Minniti, D., Catelan, M., et al. 2017, ApJ, 849, L13, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/
aa92c3
Amaro-Seoane, P., Andrews, J., Arca Sedda, M., et al. 2023, Living Reviews in Relativity, 26, 2, doi: 10.
1007/s41114-022-00041-y
Awiphan, S., Kerins, E., & Robin, A. C. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 1666, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2625
Belokurov, V., & Kravtsov, A. 2024, MNRAS, 528, 3198, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3920
Bergsten, G. J., Pascucci, I., Mulders, G. D., Fernandes, R. B., & Koskinen, T. T. 2022, AJ, 164, 190,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac8fea
Bica, E., Ortolani, S., Barbuy, B., & Oliveira, R. A. P. 2024, A&A, 687, A201, doi: 10.1051/
0004-6361/202346377
Book, L. G., & Flanagan, É. É. 2011, Phys. Rev. D, 83, 024024, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.83.024024
Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., et al. 2010, Science, 327, 977, doi: 10.1126/science.1185402
Brandt, T. D., Rizzo, M., Groff, T., et al. 2017, Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and
Systems, 3, 048002, doi: 10.1117/1.JATIS.3.4.048002
Bryson, S., Kunimoto, M., Kopparapu, R. K., et al. 2021, The Astronomical Journal, 161, 36, doi: 10.
3847/1538-3881/abc418
Burke, C. J., Christiansen, J. L., Mullally, F., et al. 2015, ApJ, 809, 8, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/809/
1/8
Cao, L., Mao, S., Nataf, D., Rattenbury, N. J., & Gould, A. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 595, doi: 10.1093/
mnras/stt1045
Cassan, A., Kubas, D., Beaulieu, J. P., et al. 2012, Nature, 481, 167, doi: 10.1038/nature10684
Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 823, 102, doi: 10.3847/
0004-637X/823/2/102
Crociati, C., Valenti, E., Ferraro, F. R., et al. 2023, ApJ, 951, 17, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acd382
Cumming, A., Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2008, PASP, 120, 531, doi: 10.1086/588487
Dalessandro, E., Crociati, C., Cignoni, M., et al. 2022, ApJ, 940, 170, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/
ac9907
Dotter, A. 2016, \apjs, 222, 8, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/1/8
Eilers, A.-C., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2022, ApJ, 928, 23, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac54ad
El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., Cendes, Y., et al. 2023a, MNRAS, 521, 4323, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad799
—. 2023b, MNRAS, 521, 4323, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad799
Ferraro, F. R., Pallanca, C., Lanzoni, B., et al. 2021, Nature Astronomy, 5, 311, doi: 10.1038/
s41550-020-01267-y
Fulton, B. J., Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 109, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/
aa80eb
Gandhi, P., Dashwood Brown, C., Zhao, Y., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.16479, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.16479
Garro, E. R., Minniti, D., & Fernández-Trincado, J. G. 2024, A&A, 687, A214, doi: 10.1051/
0004-6361/202347389
Gould, A. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2407.06484, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2407.06484
Gould, A., Dorsher, S., Gaudi, B. S., & Udalski, A. 2006, Acta Astron., 56, 1, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
astro-ph/0601001
60

Gould, A., Huber, D., Penny, M., & Stello, D. 2015, Journal of Korean Astronomical Society, 48, 93,
doi: 10.5303/JKAS.2015.48.2.093
Gould, A., Yee, J. C., & Dong, S. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2406.14531, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2406.14531
Gratton, R., Bragaglia, A., Carretta, E., et al. 2019, A&A Rev., 27, 8, doi: 10.1007/
s00159-019-0119-3
Grunblatt, S. K., Wilson, R. F., Winter, A., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.10647, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.10647
Heger, A., Müller, B., & Mandel, I. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2304.09350, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2304.09350
Hon, M., Huber, D., Kuszlewicz, J. S., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal, 919, 131, doi: 10.3847/
1538-4357/ac14b1
Huber, D., Pinsonneault, M., Beck, P., et al. 2023, Asteroseismology with the Roman Galactic Bulge TimeDomain Survey, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.03237
Johnson, C. I., Rich, R. M., Simion, I. T., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 1469, doi: 10.1093/mnras/
stac1840
Johnson, S. A., Penny, M., Gaudi, B. S., et al. 2020, AJ, 160, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aba75b
Kerins, E., Robin, A. C., & Marshall, D. J. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 1202, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.
2009.14791.x
Kerins, E., Bachelet, E., Beaulieu, J.-P., et al. 2023a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.10210, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.10210
Kerins, E., Awiphan, S., Edmondson, K., et al. 2023b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.10202, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.10202
Klüter, J., Huston, M. J., Aronica, A., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2411.18821. https://arxiv.
org/abs/2411.18821
Knuth, D. E. 1992, arXiv Mathematics e-prints, math/9205211, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.math/
9205211
Koshimoto, N., Baba, J., & Bennett, D. P. 2021, ApJ, 917, 78, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac07a8
Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04022.x
Kupfer, T., Danielski, C., Gandhi, P., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.14956, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.14956
Kupfer, T., Korol, V., Littenberg, T. B., et al. 2024, ApJ, 963, 100, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2068
Lam, C. Y., Lu, J. R., Hosek, Jr., M. W., Dawson, W. A., & Golovich, N. R. 2020, ApJ, 889, 31, doi: 10.
3847/1538-4357/ab5fd3
Lam, C. Y., Lu, J. R., Udalski, A., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933, L23, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac7442
Lam, C. Y., Abrams, N., Andrews, J., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.12514, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.12514
Lamberts, A., Blunt, S., Littenberg, T. B., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 5888, doi: 10.1093/mnras/
stz2834
Marchant,
P.,
& Bodensteiner,
J. 2024,
ARA&A, 62,
21,
doi: 10.1146/
annurev-astro-052722-105936
Mayor, M., & Queloz, D. 1995, Nature, 378, 355, doi: 10.1038/378355a0
Molnár, L., Kalup, C., & Joyce, M. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.12459, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2306.12459
Montet, B. T., Yee, J. C., & Penny, M. T. 2017, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 129,
044401, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aa57fb
Mróz, P., Udalski, A., Skowron, J., et al. 2019, ApJS, 244, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab426b
Musella, I., Leccia, S., Molinaro, R., et al. 2024, ApJS, 275, 26, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad863c
61

Nunota, K., Sumi, T., Koshimoto, N., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2410.23553, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2410.23553
O’Donnell. 1994
Pardo, K., Chang, T.-C., Doré, O., & Wang, Y. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.14968, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.14968
Penny, M. T. 2014, ApJ, 790, 142, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/790/2/142
Penny, M. T., Gaudi, B. S., Kerins, E., et al. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 241, 3,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aafb69
Penny, M. T., Kerins, E., Rattenbury, N., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 2, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt927
Pérez-Villegas, A., Barbuy, B., Kerber, L. O., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 3251, doi: 10.1093/mnras/
stz3162
Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., & Marcy, G. W. 2013, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
110, 19273, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1319909110
Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y., Epstein, C., et al. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
215, 19, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/215/2/19
Rix, H.-W., Chandra, V., Andrae, R., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 941, 45, doi: 10.3847/
1538-4357/ac9e01
Robin, A. C., Reylé, C., Derrière, S., & Picaud, S. 2003, åp, 409, 523, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:
20031117
Saha, A., Vivas, A. K., Olszewski, E. W., et al. 2019, ApJ, 874, 30, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab07ba
Sahu, K., & Sajadian, S. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.17725, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.17725
Sahu, K. C., Anderson, J., Casertano, S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac739e
Sharma, S., Stello, D., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Huber, D., & Bedding, T. R. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal,
822, 15, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/822/1/15
Silva Aguirre, V., Bojsen-Hansen, M., Slumstrup, D., et al. 2018, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 475, 5487, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty150
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Breckinridge, J., et al. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Stello, D., Zinn, J., Elsworth, Y., et al. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 835, 83, doi: 10.3847/
1538-4357/835/1/83
Street, R. A., Gough-Kelly, S., Lam, C., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.13792, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.13792
Sumi, T., & Penny, M. T. 2016, ApJ, 827, 139, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/827/2/139
Sumi, T., Bennett, D. P., Bond, I. A., et al. 2013, ApJ, 778, 150, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/778/2/
150
Surot, F., Valenti, E., Gonzalez, O. A., et al. 2020, A&A, 644, A140, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/
202038346
Suzuki, D., Bennett, D. P., Sumi, T., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 145, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/145
Terry, S. K., Hosek, Jr., M. W., Lu, J. R., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.12485, doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2306.12485
Wang, Y., Pardo, K., Chang, T.-C., & Doré, O. 2021, Phys. Rev. D, 103, 084007, doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevD.103.084007
—. 2022, Phys. Rev. D, 106, 084006, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.106.084006
Weiss, L. M., Marcy, G. W., Petigura, E. A., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 48, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/
aa9ff6
WFIRST Astrometry Working Group, Sanderson, R. E., Bellini, A., et al. 2019, Journal of Astronomical
Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 5, 044005, doi: 10.1117/1.JATIS.5.4.044005
Wilson, R. F., Barclay, T., Powell, B. P., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 269, 5,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/acf3df
62

Yee, J. C., & Gould, A. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2306.15037, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.15037
Zinn, J. C., Stello, D., Elsworth, Y., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 251, 23,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abbee3

63

